Title: Compiler-Driven Approximation Tuning for Hyperdimensional Computing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.26547v1

Published Time: Fri, 26 Jun 2026 00:25:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Compiler-Driven Approximation Tuning for Hyperdimensional Computing 

## Xavier Routh 

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Urbana, IL, USA 

xrouth2@illinois.edu 

## Abdul Rafae Noor 

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Urbana, IL, USA 

arnoor2@illinois.edu 

## Akash Kothari 

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Urbana, IL, USA 

akashk4@illinois.edu 

## Zheyu Li 

University of California San Diego La Jolla, CA, USA 

zhl178@ucsd.edu 

## Mahbod Afarin 

University of California San Diego La Jolla, CA, USA 

mafarin@ucsd.edu 

## Tajana Rosing 

University of California San Diego La Jolla, CA, USA 

tajana@ucsd.edu 

## Vikram Adve 

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Urbana, IL, USA 

vadve@illinois.edu 

## Abstract 

As Moore’s law reaches its physical and economic limits, domain-specific approaches are increasingly employed to accelerate machine learning workloads. Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC) represents one such emerging paradigm, offering an alternative to conventional deep learning tech-niques. Rooted in cognitive models of computation, HDC is designed bottom-up with hardware efficiency as a first-class objective. Consequently, HDC workloads map natu-rally to heterogeneous hardware platforms, including CPUs, GPUs, and FPGAs, as well as emerging in-memory comput-ing technologies such as Resistive RAM (ReRAM) and Phase-Change Memory (PCM). The intrinsic tolerance of HDC algorithms to noise and approximation enables substantial performance gains with minimal loss in inference quality. In this work, we introduce ApproxHDC , a framework for automated identification and application of domain-specific approximations in HDC workloads. ApproxHDC extends the HPVM-HDC compiler infrastructure to enable retargetable compilation across diverse hardware backends, including CPUs, GPUs, and simulated ReRAM and PCM-based accel-erators. The space of possible software and hardware ap-proximations in HDC is exponentially large, making exhaus-tive exploration intractable; ApproxHDC employs efficient search and analysis techniques to navigate this space and identify high-impact approximations. We further integrate hardware-level approximation mechanisms within the HDC accelerator to demonstrate ApproxHDC’s ability to exploit both software and hardware approximations. Experimental evaluation shows that ApproxHDC achieves up to 17.25 ×

speedup on CPUs, 15.02 × on GPUs, and 4.69 × on SpecPCM while staying within user-specified quality-of-service con-straints, outperforming the state-of-the-art MicroHD frame-work by 3.49 ×. HDC-specific search space pruning reduces the design space by up to 86 orders of magnitude, enabling discovery of high-quality configurations within minutes. 

Keywords: Compilers, Hyperdimensional Computing, Het-erogeneous Systems, Approximate Computing 

## 1 Introduction 

With machine learning models pressing up against the mem-ory and computational limits of current hardware, modern hardware devices are experiencing reduced performance and higher energy consumption [ 2 ]. To address the performance, energy, and accuracy needs of modern workloads, the brain-inspired paradigm Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC) [ 13 ]is attracting increasing interest. HDC encodes information as 

hypervectors , very high-dimensional vectors made up of thou-sands of elements. Because HDC operations are lightweight, highly parallelizable, and noise-tolerant, they are particularly well-suited for computations in resource-constrained envi-ronments. Consequently, HDC has been employed in a wide range of applications, including natural language processing [ 27 ], robotics [ 22 ], voice and gesture recognition [ 12 , 26 ], emotion recognition [ 5 ], graph and hypergraph learning [ 14 , 23 ], DNA sequencing [ 17 ], recommended systems [ 9 ], and bio-signal processing [3]. A key property of HDC is its intrinsic resilience to noise and approximation. Because information is distributed across thousands of dimensions, individual errors in computation or storage barely affect the final result [ 18 ]. This stands in sharp contrast to deep neural networks, where even small perturbations in intermediate activations can cascade into 

> 1
> arXiv:2606.26547v1 [cs.PL] 25 Jun 2026 Xavier Routh, Abdul Rafae Noor, Akash Kothari, Zheyu Li, Mahbod Afarin, Tajana Rosing, and Vikram Adve

large accuracy losses. The error tolerance of HDC opens a rich design space, allowing one to deliberately introduce im-precision through reduced arithmetic precision, skipped loop iterations, cheaper algorithmic variants, or relaxed hardware operating points while still maintaining acceptable inference quality. These approximations, in principle, translate directly into gains in execution time and energy consumption. The challenge, however, is that the space of possible ap-proximations is combinatorially large. A single HDC appli-cation may contain dozens of primitive operations, each offering multiple approximation strategies with continuous or discrete parameters. When the application targets hetero-geneous hardware, the space expands further, because each backend exposes its own set of hardware-level knobs such as ADC resolution, write-verify depth, multi-level cell configu-ration, and analog quantization scale. Manually navigating this space is impractical, as configurations rarely transfer across datasets or backends, and cross-operation interactions are hard to predict without empirical evaluation. Existing approximation frameworks partially address this problem but fall short in the HDC context. General-purpose approximate computing systems such as EnerJ [ 28 ], Approx-HPVM [ 29 ], and ApproxTuner [ 30 ] target deep learning and image processing pipelines and lack the domain-specific compiler support needed to analyze HDC primitives. On the HDC side, MicroHD [ 25 ] explores a limited hyperpa-rameter space using a Python library without compiler in-tegration, making it unable to exploit hardware-specific ap-proximation knobs or to apply fine-grained, per-operation approximations. Neither class of prior work jointly considers software-level and hardware-level approximation for HDC across heterogeneous targets. In this work, we present ApproxHDC , a framework that closes this gap. ApproxHDC extends the HPVM-HDC com-piler infrastructure [ 2 ] to automatically identify all HDC primitive invocations within an application, construct the applicable approximation design space per operation, and ef-ficiently search that space subject to a user-specified quality-of-service (QoS) constraint. The framework supports retar-getable compilation to CPUs, GPUs, and simulated ReRAM-and PCM-based in-memory accelerators [ 8 , 31 ], and it treats both software transformations and hardware-level knobs as first-class dimensions of the search space. To keep search tractable, ApproxHDC provides mechanisms for developers to prune the space through lightweight source annotations, and it leverages domain knowledge about HDC to eliminate unpromising regions productively. Overall, this paper makes the following contributions: 

• We introduce ApproxHDC , an auto-tuning system for HDC applications that automates approximation se-lection to jointly optimize end-to-end performance, energy, and quality of service across heterogeneous hardware targets. 

• We provide unified support for software and hardware approximations in HDC, including integration of in-memory accelerator knobs into the compiler-driven tuning loop. 

• We develop HDC-specific techniques to prune the approximation search space, combining automatic domain-aware pruning with developer-guided anno-tations, to substantially reduce auto-tuning time. Our pruning reduces the search space by up to 86 ×, en-abling discovery of high-quality configurations within minutes. Notably, no single pruning strategy uniformly achieves the highest performance across all applica-tions, underscoring the importance of providing de-velopers with mechanisms to productively guide the search. 

• We evaluate ApproxHDC extensively across four HDC benchmarks (HD-Classification, HD-Clustering, RelHD, and HD-Hashtable), multiple datasets, and a range of hardware targets. Our results demonstrate: (i) up to 

17.25 × speedup on CPUs, 15.02 × on GPUs, and 4.69 ×

on SpecPCM while staying within user-specified QoS constraints; and (ii) a 3.49 × speedup advantage over the state-of-the-art MicroHD framework through a richer, compiler-driven approximation spaces. 

## 2 Background 

2.1 Hyperdimensional Computing 

Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC) is an emerging compu-tational paradigm inspired by the brain’s use of distributed, high-dimensional representations for cognition. Instead of operating on low-dimensional numerical values as in con-ventional machine learning, HDC represents data using high-dimensional vectors, called hypervectors, often consisting of thousands of dimensions. Information is encoded and manip-ulated through simple, mathematically well-defined opera-tions on these hypervectors, enabling highly efficient and ro-bust computation. HDC systems are naturally error-tolerant due to their distributed structure and can learn from limited data without the need for expensive, iterative optimization methods like backpropagation used in deep learning. This makes HDC particularly suitable for resource-constrained en-vironments and applications requiring fast, on-device learn-ing or inference. While traditional deep learning models often require large amounts of data, substantial compute re-sources, and energy-intensive training pipelines, HDC offers a lightweight but effective alternative with lower compu-tational overhead, faster training, and inherent suitability for hardware acceleration. These properties make HDC a compelling approach for applications in edge AI, biomedi-cal signal processing, and other domains where efficiency, robustness, and interpretability are critical. The increased performance and inherent error resilience of HDC come at a cost: achieving the desired accuracy for a given application typically requires extensive exploration of 

> 2Compiler-Driven Approximation Tuning for Hyperdimensional Computing

hyperparameters and algorithmic strategies to compensate for the simplified learning mechanisms employed by HDC. A typical HDC application consists of three main stages: encoding, training, and inference. In the encoding stage, raw input data is transformed into high-dimensional hy-pervectors, capturing the essential features of the data in a distributed representation. During training, hypervectors corresponding to inputs from the same class are combined to form class hypervectors or prototype representations, typ-ically using simple aggregation operations such as vector addition and normalization. Finally, in the inference stage, a query hypervector is compared to the stored class hyper-vectors using a similarity or dissimilarity metric, commonly cosine similarity or Hamming distance, to identify the clos-est match and produce the predicted label. Each of these stages is highly parallelizable, allowing HDC applications to efficiently leverage modern heterogeneous hardware, and the distributed nature of hypervectors provides robustness to noise and approximation throughout the pipeline. 

2.2 HDC++ 

HDC++ [ 2 ] is a domain-specific, high-level programming lan-guage for hyperdimensional computing, embedded within C++. It exposes core HDC operations as first-class primitives, enabling productive and expressive development of HDC applications. Computations in HDC++ operate on hyper-vectors, representing individual encoded features or class data, and on hypermatrices, representing collections of hy-pervectors. Unlike prior programming approaches for HDC, HDC++ supports retargetable compilation across a wide range of hardware, including CPUs, GPUs (with optimized libraries), and custom HDC accelerators, using the HPVM-HDC compiler, a retargetable compiler developed specifically for heterogeneous HDC workloads. In terms of development effort, HDC++ applications typically require about twice the lines of code compared to an equivalent Python implemen-tation targeting CPUs, but are significantly more concise than equivalent CUDA implementations. Crucially, a single HDC++ application can be compiled for multiple hardware targets, including accelerators for which no prior implemen-tation exists, eliminating the need for maintaining multiple target-specific versions of the same application. Another key feature of HDC++ is the ability for developers to control software approximation through concise source code annotations, typically requiring only one or two lines per HDC primitive. These annotations instruct the HPVM-HDC compiler to generate hardware-specific code with the specified approximation transformations applied. The details of these transformations are described in Section 4.2. This compact annotation mechanism enables productive explo-ration of the approximation space inherent in HDC, allowing developers to achieve the desired accuracy manually while maintaining control over performance and efficiency trade-offs. Listing 1 describes a simple HDC++ example which encodes input data using random projection encoding, cal-culates the dissimilarity using Hamming distance and then identifies the most dissimilar label using argument mini-mum. The approximation annotation on line 12 instructs the HPVM-HDC compiler to generate target-specific code which calculates Hamming distance using only the first 1024 elements of data.               

> 1hypervector <617> input_features = ...;
> 2hypermatrix <2048, 617> rp_matrix = ...;
> 3hypermatrix <26, 2048> clusters = ...;
> 4// Encode via random projection
> 5hypervector <2048> encoded_data =
> 6__hetero_hdc_matmul(input_features, rp_matrix);
> 7// Compute Hamming distance to all clusters
> 8hypervector <26> dists =
> 9__hetero_hdc_hamming_distance(encoded_data, clusters);
> 10 // Approximate: use only first 1024 dimensions
> 11 __hetero_hdc_red_perf(dists, 0.0, 0.5, 1);
> 12 // Select nearest cluster
> 13 int label = __hetero_hdc_arg_min(dists);

Listing 1. HDC++ example for random-projection encoding and dissimilarity between query and class hypervectors. 

2.3 HPVM-HDC 

HPVM-HDC [ 2 ] is a retargetable compiler infrastructure de-signed specifically for hyperdimensional computing (HDC) applications. Built on top of the HPVM [ 7, 19 ] heterogeneous compiler framework, HPVM-HDC provides an intermedi-ate representation (IR) that captures the high-level seman-tics of HDC operations, including encoding, training, and similarity-based inference. The HPVM-HDC IR abstracts away hardware-specific details while preserving the struc-ture of HDC primitives, enabling the compiler to perform optimizations such as parallelization and target-specific code generation. Each HDC++ language primitive corresponds to a unique HPVM-HDC IR operation, allowing the intermedi-ate representation to retain the domain-specific semantics of HDC within the compiler. Internally, the HPVM-HDC compiler translates HDC++ applications into the HPVM IR, which provides constructs for representing multiple forms of parallelism, including task-level, data-level, and streaming parallelism. Parallel programs are represented as a hierar-chical directed acyclic graph (DAG), where nodes fall into two categories: internal nodes, which capture hierarchical parallelism by containing entire subgraphs, and leaf nodes, which represent individual units of computation expressed in LLVM IR. Edges between nodes denote logical data trans-fers, meaning explicit copies may or may not be required. Additionally, each node can be annotated with one or more hardware targets, enabling the compiler to generate code for multiple backends and fully exploit heterogeneous platforms such as CPUs, GPUs, and (Intel) FPGAs. 

> 3Xavier Routh, Abdul Rafae Noor, Akash Kothari, Zheyu Li, Mahbod Afarin, Tajana Rosing, and Vikram Adve

In addition to generating HPVM IR for retargetable het-erogeneous compilation, HPVM-HDC implements two pa-rameterized software approximation transformations at the IR level. The first, Automatic Binarization Propagation, per-forms a quantization-like transformation on hypervectors, representing the resulting data as single-bit packed vectors and inter-procedurally updates computations and allocations as required. The second, Reduction Perforation, applies pa-rameterized loop perforation by regularly skipping iterations in HDC operations that involve reductions. Both of these software approximations are described in detail in Section 4.2. HPVM-HDC also supports compilation for specialized HDC accelerators, including an HD-ASIC and an HD Resistive RAM (ReRAM) accelerator. However, it does not currently exploit hardware-specific approximation strategies for these accelerators, a capability we introduce in this work. 

2.4 ReRAM and SpecPCM 

Resistive RAM (ReRAM) and phase-change memory (PCM) are two classes of non-volatile memory that support in-memory computing, the execution of arithmetic directly within the memory array without moving data to a separate processing unit. Both technologies store information as ana-log resistance states in dense crossbar arrays, and both can perform vector operations such as dot products and Ham-ming distance through the physics of current summation along array columns. These properties make them a natural substrate for HDC, where the core computational patterns reduce to parallel element-wise and reduction operations over long vectors. 

ReRAM-based HDC acceleration. In a ReRAM cross-bar, each memristive device is programmed to a conductance proportional to a hypervector element. A read operation applies input voltages to the rows and senses the summed column currents, effectively computing a dot product in a single analog step. FSL-HD [ 31 ] exploits this structure as a few-shot learning accelerator that performs both tensorized encoding and Hamming-distance inference entirely within the ReRAM array. By keeping hypervectors resident in mem-ory and avoiding off-chip data movement, FSL-HD achieves substantial speedups and energy savings over CPU and GPU baselines, while also improving on the area efficiency of the earlier SAPIENS design [ 20 ]. The key insight from an ap-proximation standpoint is that ReRAM reads are inherently imprecise: device-to-device variability, write noise, and lim-ited ADC resolution all introduce errors, yet HDC accuracy is largely preserved because the final prediction depends on aggregate statistics across thousands of dimensions rather than on any single element. 

PCM-based HDC acceleration. SpecPCM [ 8 ] takes a complementary approach using phase-change memory. The architecture offloads distance computations, spectral cluster-ing distances and Hamming similarity for database search into PCM crossbar arrays organized as parallel memory banks with a 2T2R cell structure. SpecPCM integrates two distinct superlattice PCM device types within the same ac-celerator: one optimized for fast, low-voltage programming suited to clustering workloads, and another providing long retention and low read noise for reliable similarity search. SpecPCM further increases effective storage density through multi-level cells (MLC), packing multiple hypervector di-mensions into a single device using a dimension-packing scheme. Stages not suitable for analog execution (e.g., ar-gument selection) are handled by near-memory ASIC logic, enabling significant speedups and energy-efficiency gains over software baselines. ReRAM and PCM accelerators provide tunable parame-ters (e.g., ADC resolution, write-verify depth, MLC levels, quantization scale) that trade computation accuracy for la-tency, energy, and area by introducing controlled noise. Due to HDC’s robustness to noise, this has minimal impact on accuracy. In this work, ApproxHDC includes these hardware knobs in its approximation search space alongside software techniques to jointly optimize accuracy, performance, and energy. 

## 3 Design 

ApproxHDC is implemented as an extension to the HPVM-HDC compiler through two dedicated compiler passes. Lever-aging the approximation specification mechanism provided by HDC++, where approximation types and their param-eters can be expressed via in-program source annotations (Section 2.2), ApproxHDC automatically selects and applies ap-propriate approximations. Specifically, ApproxHDC encodes its decisions by inserting the corresponding annotations directly into the HDC++ application, enabling seamless in-tegration with the existing compilation and optimization pipeline. This enables ApproxHDC to exist externally to the compiler and be easily modified without needing to recom-pile the HPVM-HDC compiler (which is written in C++). The overall compilation flow is shown in Figure 1. 

HDC Primitive Identification. The first compiler pass performs a static analysis of the HDC++ application code (prior to the introduction of any approximations) to identify all invocations of HDC primitives used in the program. Each primitive instance is uniquely characterized by its context, which includes the enclosing function and basic block. When multiple occurrences of the same primitive appear within a single basic block, they are further disambiguated based on their execution order within that block. The identified prim-itives, along with their contextual metadata, are aggregated into a serializable JSON representation, enabling external tools such as ApproxHDC to access a structured view of the program’s HDC operations (see Listing 2).     

> 1"op": "__hetero_hdc_cos_sim", "Inst_ID": 1, "BB_ID": 8,
> 2"CallingFunction": "HDCInferenceFunc",
> 4Compiler-Driven Approximation Tuning for Hyperdimensional Computing HDC++
> Application
> Quality of
> Service (QoS)
> Evaluator
> HDC Primitive
> Identification
> HDC
> Approximation
> Annotation
> ApproxHDC
> Tuning System
> HPVM
> HDC
> Software
> Approximations

CPU  GPU 

> Hardware
> Approximations

ReRAM  PCM  

> __ hetero_hdc_no_approx (Op1)
> __ hetero_hdc_no_approx (Op2)
> …
> Optional User
> Annotations
> Reduction Perforation
> Automatic Binarization
> Encoding Dimensionality
> Element Type Representation
> Algorithmic Choice
> ADC Resolution
> Write –Verify Cycles
> Analog Quantization Scale
> Multi -Level Cell (MLC) Bits

Figure 1. Overview of the ApproxHDC workflow. Given HDC applications written in HDC++ along with an application-specific quality-of-service (QoS) evaluator, ApproxHDC first extracts the set of HDC primitives used in the program. It then performs efficient autotuning to explore approximation choices at both the global and per-operation levels. Finally, ApproxHDC applies the selected approximations via automatically generated source-level annotations, ensuring that the specified QoS constraints are satisfied. The search space considered by ApproxHDC spans both software- and hardware-level approximations.  

> 3"ArgType": ["<8 x 1024 x f32>", "<1024 x f32>"],

Listing 2. Interface for ApproxHDC emitted from HPVM-HDC for approximation tuning. 

ApproxHDC Tuning System. After identifying the HDC primitives within the application, the ApproxHDC Tuning System constructs the approximation design space to be explored. This space encompasses both software-level ap-proximations, which are applicable across general-purpose hardware targets such as CPUs and GPUs, and hardware-specific approximations, which target specialized architec-tures including HD-PCM and HD-ReRAM. The specific types of approximations supported are detailed in Section 4. To evaluate the impact of different approximation choices, the user provides an application-specific driver that executes the program with the appropriate command-line arguments and datasets, and reports a quality-of-service (QoS) metric (e.g., inference accuracy). The ApproxHDC Tuning System then empirically explores multiple approximation configurations, measuring QoS, execution time, and energy consumption. 

ApproxHDC can be tuned for either end-to-end performance or energy efficiency, subject to a specified QoS constraint. For each evaluated configuration, the system generates a JSON representation (consistent with the format produced by the HDC Primitive Identification pass) that records the selected approximations and their parameterizations (see Listing 3). Each operation may be assigned zero, one, or mul-tiple approximations. The tuning system further supports user-defined approximation parameters, enabling extensibil-ity to new approximation techniques and hardware targets. By default, the tuning system constructs the approximation space across all HDC operations present in the application. Section 4 describes the mechanisms provided by ApproxHDC 

to customize and constrain this space, allowing fine-grained control over which operations and approximation parame-ters are explored.        

> 1"parent_func": "Z4nodePu11matrix_typeIL",
> 2"intrinsic": "llvm.hpvm.hdc.cossim",
> 3"number": 0, "op_type": "hmhv",
> 4"approximations":
> 5[{"red_perf": {"base": 1.0, "stride": 8, "extent": 0.84}},
> 6{"alg_choice": "llvm.hpvm.hdc.cossim"}]

Listing 3. Interface emitted from the ApproxHDC Tuning System to specify fine-grained, per-operation approximation configurations. 

HDC Approximation Application. The second com-piler pass consumes the fine-grained approximation con-figurations produced by the tuning system (as illustrated in Listing 3) and automatically inserts the corresponding source-level approximation annotations into the HDC++ ap-plication. Leveraging the contextual metadata collected dur-ing the primitive identification phase, each instance of an HDC primitive can be uniquely identified and independently annotated, enabling the application of distinct approxima-tion strategies to different occurrences of the same primitive. 

Compilation and Execution. The HPVM-HDC com-piler is employed to perform the necessary compiler trans-formations specified by the inserted source-level annota-tions. Section 4 describes the set of supported software and hardware approximations, including those developed as part of ApproxHDC . Using the user-provided application driver, the annotated HDC++ program is compiled and executed, and the corresponding quality-of-service (QoS) metric is recorded. These results are then fed back to the ApproxHDC 

Tuning System, which uses them to guide the selection of subsequent approximation configurations. The tuning pro-cess continues iteratively until a specified time budget or 

> 5Xavier Routh, Abdul Rafae Noor, Akash Kothari, Zheyu Li, Mahbod Afarin, Tajana Rosing, and Vikram Adve

iteration limit is reached, at which point it outputs the fi-nal approximation configuration that maximizes the chosen objective function. 

## 4 Approximation Tuning System 

4.1 ApproxHDC Implementation 

We implement ApproxHDC in Python for ease of development and integration, in contrast to the HPVM-HDC compiler, which is implemented in C++. ApproxHDC maintains built-in knowledge of the available HDC primitives and their cor-responding approximation transformations in HPVM-HDC. This design choice is essential, as not all approximations are applicable to every HDC operation. For instance, the reduc-tion perforation approximation applies only to reduction-style computations such as cosine similarity. During opera-tion, ApproxHDC parses the list of HDC primitives extracted from an HDC++ application (as shown in Listing 2) and determines the set of applicable approximations for each primitive instance. The implementation uses OpenTuner [ 1 ]as the underlying auto-tuning framework. For each tuner, 

ApproxHDC automatically constructs the corresponding tun-ing classes, defining the appropriate parameter spaces and objective functions to guide the search process. 

4.2 Approximation Transformations 

ApproxHDC provides support for automated approximation tuning of various software and novel hardware approxima-tion for HDC. In this section, we describe the specific ap-proximation transformations which are supported. 

Reduction Perforation. Beyond point-wise operations, many HDC primitives perform reduction computations of various kinds. These reductions commonly appear in encod-ing algorithms such as random projection, which involves matrix–vector dot-product operations, as well as in inference stages, where similarity or dissimilarity metrics are com-puted through reductions. Owing to the inherent error re-silience of HDC algorithms, such computations are amenable to approximation techniques like loop perforation. In reduc-tion perforation, the compiler lowers HDC primitives into loop nests and modifies the reduction-axis loop to skip it-erations at regular intervals, defined by a specified stride, rather than iterating over the entire domain. HDC++ ex-poses this approximation via the __hetero_hdc_red_perf 

annotation, which accepts three parameters—starting off-set, ending offset, and stride—to describe the perforation behavior. For similarity and dissimilarity computations, the resultant values are used as-is; for operations such as ma-trix–vector dot products, the results are scaled appropriately to compensate for the skipped iterations. Due to the diverse ways in which HDC applications are structured, not all reduction operations are equally amenable to perforation. Applying reduction perforation during en-coding stages often degrades the quality-of-service (QoS) by producing poorly defined class hypervectors. Moreover, the benefit of perforation is highly application-dependent, as it is influenced by factors such as the encoding dimensional-ity as well as other approximations within the application. In many cases, performance gains without significant QoS degradation are achieved only beyond an application-specific crossover point, where the reduction size and approximation tolerance align favorably. 

Automatic Binarization. In the inference stage of HDC, a widely used strategy involves computing the Hamming dis-tance to measure dissimilarity between the input hypervec-tor and a set of class hypervectors. A common performance-oriented implementation of Hamming distance in HDC in-volves preprocessing hypervectors to the {+ 1, −1} represen-tation. This transformation not only improves the QoS for certain applications but also enables use of more hardware-efficient data types. The two possible values can be compactly encoded using packed single-bit representations, with each hypervector element stored as a single bit. This compact format enables highly efficient computation using bitwise operations such as xor and popcount . Moreover, this repre-sentation significantly reduces data movement between het-erogeneous compute devices such as CPU and GPU. HPVM-HDC automates this inter-procedural transformation using a compiler flag, rewriting both the computation and data movement to leverage the packed representation. 

Encoding Dimensionality. A key hyperparameter in HDC is the encoding dimensionality, which determines the size of the feature vectors forming the core representation of the algorithm. Increasing this dimensionality can improve the QoS by enabling the model to capture more diverse and discriminative features. However, higher dimensionality also significantly increases computational cost—often quadrati-cally in encoding algorithms and linearly in inference algo-rithms. This growth not only amplifies overall computation but also intensifies data movement across heterogeneous hardware (e.g., between CPUs and GPUs), leading to addi-tional performance and energy-efficiency degradations. 

Element Type Representation. A parameter closely re-lated to the encoding dimensionality is the element type representation used for hypervectors and their associated computations. Hypervectors may be represented using in-teger data types (8, 16, 32, or 64-bit) or floating-point types (FP16 or FP32), with computations mapped to the correspond-ing low-level hardware instructions for each data type. In general, HDC training requires higher-precision representa-tions such as floating-point types to ensure stability and ac-curacy during learning. In contrast, inference computations can often be safely approximated by projecting class and feature hypervectors onto lower-precision integer types. At the extreme, We can represent hypervectors using 1-bit inte-ger types, enabling highly efficient bitwise operations while significantly reducing computational and memory overhead. 

> 6Compiler-Driven Approximation Tuning for Hyperdimensional Computing

Algorithmic Choice. An HDC application typically com-prises computations that can be categorized into three main stages: encoding, training, and inference. Each stage can be realized using multiple algorithmic variants, each offer-ing different trade-offs between performance and QoS. To capture this variability, we incorporate algorithmic choice as an approximation transformation within ApproxHDC . For instance, HDC inference can be implemented using the com-putationally expensive cosine similarity metric or the more hardware-efficient hamming distance computation. Similarly, as an example, encoding can be performed using random projection [ 27 ] or ID-based encoding [ 12 ]. While ApproxHDC 

provides a set of built-in algorithmic choices for common operations, developers can easily extend the framework by defining their own algorithmic variants to suit specific ap-plication needs. 

In-Memory Accelerator Approximations. In-memory analog accelerators naturally expose multiple approximation knobs stemming from device non-idealities, limited conver-sion precision, & stochastic programming behavior. HDC is highly resilient to such noise: prior work shows that even with substantial device-level errors, analog HDC systems retain near–software-equivalent accuracy while achieving large efficiency gains. This robustness enables aggressive approximation in ReRAM/PCM accelerators. We summarize the hardware knobs & ApproxHDC’s modeling approach: 

( I ) ADC Resolution : Analog operations (e.g., current summed dot products) are digitized via ADCs. Lowering ADC bit pre-cision reduces latency and power but increases quantization noise. For example, a 4-bit ADC replaces 256 levels with 16 levels, improving conversion speed at the cost of larger rounding error. ApproxHDC models this by quantizing the ideal analog value to the target bit-width and adjusting la-tency/energy accordingly. Accuracy degrades only when quantization noise dominates the HDC similarity signal. 

( II ) Write–Verify Cycles : ReRAM and PCM writes rely on iterative program-and-verify steps to reach the target resis-tance. Fewer verify cycles reduce write latency and energy but increase the chance of under or over-programming, in-troducing variability in stored values. Our simulator models this by adding resistance noise proportional to the skipped verify steps. These write inaccuracies propagate to analog operations, but HDC’s binary and majority computations tolerate noise. Thus, reducing write-verify cycles serves as a practical approximation knob that trades small accuracy loss for significant gains in performance and energy. 

( III ) Analog Quantization Scale : Another approximation knob is the quantization scale, which determines how analog out-puts are mapped to digital values. By adjusting the sensing range and gain, designers can use a tighter scale that clips or compresses large analog sums for faster, lower-precision sensing, or a wider scale that preserves detail but requires higher-precision ADCs or slower reads. Our simulator mod-els these effects by scaling and capping analog outputs to mimic saturation or reduced sensitivity. The quantization scale thus becomes an accuracy–efficiency lever, and ApproxHDC 

varies this parameter to evaluate its impact on sensing en-ergy, performance, and overall HDC accuracy. 

(IV) Multi-Level Cell (MLC) Bits : ReRAM and PCM support multi-level cells (MLC) that encode multiple resistance states and thus store several bits per device, increasing density and parallelism. However, higher MLC levels sharply degrade reliability: distinguishing many resistance states introduces significant analog noise and drift, with prior PCM measure-ments showing more than 10% error at 3 bits per cell even after write-verify, while 1–2 bits per cell remain far more stable [ 8 ]. As a result, MLC becomes an approximation knob that trades accuracy for efficiency. Our model reflects this by scaling error probability with bits per cell and incorporating the associated performance benefits (for instance, 2 bits per cell can provide roughly 2 × throughput). ApproxHDC then sweeps these configurations to identify Pareto points, where HDC’s intrinsic noise tolerance often makes 2 bits per cell an attractive balance of accuracy and speed. These approximation knobs are exposed through a unified interface in both the compiler and simulator. As in SpecPCM, where the ISA sets bits-per-cell, ADC precision, and verify cycles, our HPVM-HDC backend provides intrinsic hooks for 

ApproxHDC to specify these parameters before kernel launch. The simulator then applies calibrated ReRAM/PCM models to inject the corresponding latency, energy, and error behav-ior. Treating each knob as a dimension in the search space, 

ApproxHDC sweeps ADC resolution, MLC level, and write-verify depth to identify Pareto points using end-to-end accu-racy and modeled performance/energy. This enables clear trade-off analysis, such as small accuracy loss for meaning-ful energy savings when lowering ADC bits, versus steeper accuracy penalties of more aggressive MLC configurations. 

Custom Application Specific Parameters. For gen-erality, ApproxHDC allows application developers to intro-duce custom, application specific tuning parameters that may not be covered by the existing approximation tech-niques. Unlike the automatically inferred approximations, these parameters must be explicitly specified by the user. They can represent either integer-valued parameters or enu-meration parameters that select among a predefined set of configuration options. This flexibility enables develop-ers to extend the tuning space to include domain-specific controls relevant to their particular HDC application. For example, HD-Clustering, HD-Classification, and RelHD all expose TRAIN_ITERATIONS as an integer knob governing the number of retraining epochs. HD-HashTable exposes 

KMERS_PER_HV , which controls how many k-mers are packed into each hash-table bucket; smaller values produce more buckets with sparser hypervector sums, changing both the 

> 7Xavier Routh, Abdul Rafae Noor, Akash Kothari, Zheyu Li, Mahbod Afarin, Tajana Rosing, and Vikram Adve

encoding cost and the query-time dot-product distribution. Micro-HD-Classification exposes N_LEVELS , the number of discrete levels in Level-ID encoding, which controls the quan-tization granularity applied to continuous input features before they are mapped to hypervectors. RelHD exposes 

RHO_SHIFT , which enables a circular left-shift permutation on the level-2 node hypervectors between graph propagation steps; this breaks symmetry between the two aggregation levels so that the similarity computation can distinguish their contributions. 

4.3 Configurable Approximation Tuning Space 

By default, the tuning system constructs the approxima-tion space over all HDC operations present in an applica-tion. A single application may include dozens of distinct HDC primitives, each contributing to the overall compu-tational behavior. However, application developers often possess application-specific insight into which operations can tolerate approximation without significantly degrading the QoS metric. While ApproxHDC ’s design could accommo-date heuristics for automatically identifying such operations, we instead provide a lightweight, user-driven mechanism for approximation space pruning via source code annota-tions. Developers can mark specific HDC primitive oper-ations with the __hetero_hdc_no_approx directive to in-struct ApproxHDC to exclude them from approximation. For convenience, users may also annotate entire HPVM-HDC subgraphs with this directive, thereby excluding all enclosed operations from the approximation search space. This allows users to focus on specific crucial stages within their HDC++ application without needing to perform intrusive changes to the HPVM-HDC compiler or the ApproxHDC Tuning System. Nearly all the applications we evaluate ApproxHDC on re-quire this annotation, specifically to prevent the application specific encoding stages from being approximated. Encoding is typically the most sensitive stage of HDC applications to approximation. 

## 5 Evaluation 

5.1 Methodology Hardware targets. The evaluation setup for CPU consists of two AMD EPYC 7453 28-Core processors, with 56 threads and 503GB of memory. The evaluation setup for GPU consists of an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU with 11GB of memory, on a host cpu of an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4216 CPU with 16 cores, 32 threads, and 192GB of memory. 

Applications. We evaluate ApproxHDC using benchmarks from the HPVM-HDC [ 2] suite, which provides baseline im-plementations in HDC++ without any approximation an-notations. Table 1 summarizes the application workloads and the corresponding datasets used in our evaluation. HD-Classification implements a classification algorithm using HD encoding and similarity primitives. The QoS (quality of service) metric for HD-Classification is classification accu-racy. HD-Clustering implements K-Means clustering using HDC. HPVM-HDC exposes two independently tunable simi-larity primitives, one for training and one for inference. The QoS metric we use is NMI (Normalized Mutual Information) score. We evaluate HD-Clustering and HD-Classification on the ISOLET dataset of spoken letter recordings [ 6]. RelHD 

[ 15 ] implements a GNN learning algorithm using HDC. It encodes node and edge features as hypervectors, and uses similarity metrics to produce node classifications. We evalu-ate on the Cora dataset of categorized scientific publications [ 21 ]. HD-HashTable [33 ] implements a genomic sequence search using HDC. Reference k-mers from a genome are bundled in multi-HV buckets. At query time, the nearest hypervector is determined via dot-product similarity. The similarity threshold and k-mers per Hypvervector are both exposed as tunable knobs. 

5.2 Tuning Space Pruning 

To demonstrate the effectiveness of the HDC-specific tech-niques to prune the approximation search space, we run and evaluate the ApproxHDC system across all four HDC++ appli-cations, on both CPU and GPU. We use four different search space configurations, each demonstrating a more aggressive form of pruning. For all configurations all other application knobs are enabled unless otherwise mentioned. The different search space configurations are as follows: 

(1) Full RedPerf : all three reduction perforation knobs are exposed—start, stride, and end—alongside encoding and data-type knobs. This is the most expressive condition but intro-duces the largest search space. 

(2) End-only + no approx hint enabled : only the end (ex-tent) knob is tunable; start and stride are fixed at their base-line values. This substantially reduces the search space while retaining the most impactful approximation lever (truncating the reduction). 

(3) No RedPerf : reduction perforation is disabled entirely. The tuner varies only global knobs (encoding dimension) and application-level parameters such as training iterations. 

(4) Full RedPerf + no approx hint enabled : all three red-perf knobs are tunable as in condition (1), but the search space is additionally pruned by the no approx hint. We evaluate the pruning effectiveness by running Approx-HDC for each configuration using a 3 hour tuning budget. The baseline configuration is the unapproximated version of the application. The target QoS metric used for each tun-ing run is the baseline QoS minus 0.05. All QoS metrics are measured from 0 to 1.0. This represents a threshold of 5% 

accuracy or 0.05 difference in NMI score. We seed each auto-tuning run with the baseline configuration as a start point. Figure 2 shows the running-best speedup achieved over the 3-hour tuning budget for each pruning condition, across all 

> 8Compiler-Driven Approximation Tuning for Hyperdimensional Computing

Table 1. Summary of HDC++ applications used to evaluate ApproxHDC . All benchmarks are taken from the HPVM-HDC [ 2 ]suite. Each application defines a domain-specific quality-of-service (QoS) metric that serves as the optimization constraint during automated approximation tuning.           

> Application Workload QoS Metric
> HD-Classification [32] Classification using HDC encoding and similarity Inference Accuracy HD-Clustering [11, 32] K-means clustering using HDC Normalized Mutual Information RelHD [15] GNN learning and data relationship analysis Inference Accuracy HD-HashTable [33] Genome sequence search for long reads sequencing using HD hashing Inference Accuracy

four applications on GPU (top row) and CPU (bottom row). Shown configurations are subject to QoS constraints. 

HD-Clustering. The baseline configuration uses float data type, cosine similarity, 20 Training iterations, and a dimensionality of 1024, achieving a Normalized Mutual In-formation (NMI) score of 0.72. ApproxHDC was able to find 13.41x (0.6708 NMI score) speedup on GPU, and 17.25 × (0.6737 NMI score) speedup on CPU. On GPU, this speedup comes from switching to int data type and using hamming similar-ity, and reducing training iterations down to 3. The reduc-tion perforation extent was held at 1.0=full. On CPU, this speedup comes from the same configuration changes, but also reducing reduction perforation inference extent to 0.9. Both devices held D=1024. For both devices, the redperf ON series struggles to find high speedups. HD-Clustering tuning runs were configured with a target NMI score of .62, below the .67 NMI score threshold that represents a reasonable QoS tradeoff from the baseline QoS score. This causes a large portion of the search budget to be wasted on evaluating configs below the QoS cutoff. The results for HD-Clustering represent a conservative estimate of max speedup within the 3 hour search budget. 

RelHD. For RelHD, we only evaluate three tuning-series, as the encoding method used is not approximate, making the no-approx hint a no-op. The baseline configuration uses D=2048, cosine similarity, and float data type. RelHD includes custom ’Rho-Shift knob’, which is a RelHD encoding specific algorithmic choice, representing a circular shift of hypervec-tors in a portion of the encoding stage. The main speedup on both CPU and GPU comes from reducing hypervector dimensionality from 2048 to 128 (16x reduction). On CPU, we were able to achieve an 11.4x speedup (.71 accuracy), and on GPU we were able to achieve a 15.02x speedup (.71 accuracy). Among top-performing configurations similar-ity ops saw little approximation by reduction perforation settings, and cosine similarity / float was chosen. Approx-imating RHO_SHIFT had little effect on performance and accuracy. All three tuning series, for both CPU and GPU, were able to converge on the same configuration area and speedup. On CPU, the series that enable reduction perfora-tion are able to achieve a slightly higher (.3x) speedup than the redperf OFF series. On GPU, the reduction perforation does not have a significant effect on the performance or accu-racy, seen by all series plateauing at the same performance, so the tuner does not spend much of its budget searching across redperf knobs, unlike CPU. 

HD-Classification. For HD-Classification, the baseline configurations is D=2048, Train Iterations = 10, using float datatype and cosine similarity, achieving a .87 accuracy. Both CPU and GPU reach the same best performing configuration, by reducing dimensionality down to 256 (8x), and training iterations down to 3. CPU achieves a speedup of 11.64x, and GPU achieves a speedup of 12.93x, both get (.82 accuracy). Both maximum speedup configurations were found by the redperf OFF series. Enabling reduction perforation for HD-Classification increases the search space size, and prevents the tuning run from finding the high performing configura-tions within a 3-hour time budget. 

HD-HashTable. For HD-HashTable, the baseline config-uration is 𝐷 = 8192 , KMERS_PER_HV = 400 ,THRESHOLD_MULT =0.9, using float data type and dot-product similarity. The baseline achieves an inference accuracy of .83. On GPU, the end-only series achieves 14 .66 × speedup (0.78 accuracy) by reducing 𝐷 from 8192 to 512, setting, KMERS_PER_HV =20 (sparser hash-table buckets), THRESHOLD_MULT =0.589 , and the redperf extent to 0.646 

(using only 65% of the hypervectors for the query dot prod-uct). The Full RedPerf and No RedPerf series both plateau at around 5×, neither tune the dimensionality enough to gain similar speedups. On CPU, the speedups are much lower, getting only up to 2.01 × (Full RedPerf). The search space for HD-Hashtable is substantially larger than the other applications at the No RedPerf pruning series, (10 16 vs. 10 3–10 4 for the other apps). The runtime of HD-HashTable is also much longer than the other applications, especially on CPU. These factors combined means on CPU the search process is severely limited by the tuning budget, only evaluating < 100 configurations within the 3 hour limit. 

5.3 Comparison to MicroHD 

MicroHD [ 24 ] implements its own version of classification using HDC in Python with limited approximation tuning support. To compare tuning systems, we port this version to HDC++ as Micro-HD-Classification. Micro-HD uses Level-ID encoding, which exposes a Level integer knob controlling 

> 9

Xavier Routh, Abdul Rafae Noor, Akash Kothari, Zheyu Li, Mahbod Afarin, Tajana Rosing, and Vikram Adve 0.0h 0.5h 1.0h 1.5h 2.0h 2.5h 3.0h                                               

> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14
> GPU
> Max speedup (×)
> HD-Clustering
> 0.0h 0.5h 1.0h 1.5h 2.0h 2.5h 3.0h
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> HD-Classification
> 0.0h 0.5h 1.0h 1.5h 2.0h 2.5h 3.0h
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14
> RelHD
> 0.0h 0.5h 1.0h 1.5h 2.0h 2.5h 3.0h
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14
> HD-HashTable
> 0.0h 0.5h 1.0h 1.5h 2.0h 2.5h 3.0h
> Hours
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14
> 16
> 18
> CPU
> Max speedup (×)
> 0.0h 0.5h 1.0h 1.5h 2.0h 2.5h 3.0h
> Hours
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 0.0h 0.5h 1.0h 1.5h 2.0h 2.5h 3.0h
> Hours
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 0.0h 0.5h 1.0h 1.5h 2.0h 2.5h 3.0h
> Hours
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> 1.6
> 1.8
> 2.0
> redperf ON redperf end-only redperf OFF redperf ON +hint baseline (1×)

Figure 2. Maximum speedup achieved over the 3-hour tuning budget for all four reduction perforation pruning conditions across all applications and GPU top row, CPU bottom row. Each curve shows the running-best speedup relative to the untuned baseline as new configurations are evaluated. End-only with encoding protection (green) typically finds more valid configurations and reaches higher peak speedups than full reduction perforation (blue), whose larger search space impedes exploration within the fixed budget. the number of levels in Level-ID encoding (range 2–1024) and a Quantization knob controlling the hypervector bit width (1–16 bits). ApproxHDC supports tuning for this through a custom tuning parameter. HDC++ does not support sub-word hypervector quantization, so our HDC++ port of Micro-HD-Classification does not expose 𝑄 ; we allow MicroHD to tune 𝑄 when measuring MicroHD’s speedup. To compare the two tuning systems we fix a shared ref-erence configuration of 𝐷 =1024 , 𝐿 =128 , 𝑄 =16 , using cosine similarity. Each system is evaluated in its own native ex-ecution model: ApproxHDC speedups compare an HPVM-compiled tuned binary against the HPVM-compiled refer-ence, and MicroHD speedups compare its best PyTorch con-figuration against the PyTorch reference. The two backends report nearly identical baseline accuracy on ISOLET ( 0.8954 

on HPVM, 0.8972 on PyTorch). We measure the maximum speedup (under accuracy threshold constraint), achieved by both ApproxHDC and MicroHD on GPU. 

ApproxHDC additionally exposes Reduction Perforation knobs ( base , stride , extent ) on every HDC operator; we fix these to their no-perforation values ( extent =1.0, stride =1,base =0) in the reference config. ApproxHDC also tunes the encoder algorithmic-choice knob, permitting Random Pro-jection in place of Level-ID. MicroHD is run until its binary search saturates ( ∼300s on ISOLET); ApproxHDC is given a fixed 2-hour tuning budget. Both systems use a shared accu-racy cutoff and target of 0.845 . Results are shown in Figure 3: 

ApproxHDC finds an approximation configuration that re-sults in 24 .65 × speedup, with a 4.8% loss in accuracy. Mi-croHD finds configurations with up to a 7.07 × speedup and a 2.4% loss in accuracy. ApproxHDC outperforms MicroHD’s best accepted configuration by 3.49 × at the same accuracy bar. The systems converge on structurally different solutions: 

ApproxHDC picks 𝐷 =512 (a 2× reduction) but aggressively perforates both cossim operators, sampling only ∼44% of the reduction length during training and ∼82% at inference. It sets 𝐿 =814 & selects Level-ID encoding with cosine sim. MicroHD picks 𝐷 =1000 (no meaningful 𝐷 reduction from the 1024 baseline) and instead cuts levels, from 128 down to 

32 (4×), while leaving quantization at the full 𝑄 =16 . MicroHD has no analogue of per-op reduction perforation, so it cannot chase the extent knobs that drive ApproxHDC’s speedup. The 3.49 × gap is a result of ApproxHDC’s more expressive search space: the tuner finds that RP-extent on both cossim operators is load-bearing at strict accuracy, and those axes do not exist for MicroHD. ApproxHDC crosses MicroHD’s max speedup very early in its budget: the first ApproxHDC config-uration to beat MicroHD’s best lands at 𝑡 ≈282 s ( ∼4.7 min) into tuning, already at 13 .52 ×. The remaining ∼2h of the 

ApproxHDC budget is spent increasing 13 × up to 24 .65 ×.

5.4 SpecPCM 

Beyond software approximation on CPUs and GPUs, ApproxHDC 

supports hardware-level approximation knobs exposed by the SpecPCM in-memory computing accelerator (Section 4). We evaluate ApproxHDC on SpecPCM for HD-Classification using the SpecPCM simulator [ 8 ]. Tunable hardware knobs include ADC resolution, write-verify cycles, quantization scale, and multi-level cell (MLC) bits per device. 

10 Compiler-Driven Approximation Tuning for Hyperdimensional Computing 0h00m 0h12m 0h24m 0h36m 0h48m 1h00m   

> Time since start
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Max speedup achieved
> ApproxHDC HPVM (max=24.65×)
> MicroHD best PyTorch (7.07×)
> baseline (1×)

Figure 3. Measured maximum speedup over time for MicroHD’s classification benchmark using ApproxHDC ’s approximation tuning framework. MicroHD’s achieved speedup is shown as a horizontal reference line. ApproxHDC 

identifies superior approximation configurations within 5 minutes and ultimately discovers a configuration that is ap-proximately 3.5 × more efficient than MicroHD. We use a reference configuration of 𝐷 =1024 ,TRAINING_ITER =10 , MLC =1, ADC_RES =8, ADC_STEP =1,ADC_FLOOR =−127 , ADC_CEIL =128 ,WRITE_VERIFY_CYCLES =0. On the simulator this configu-ration achieves an accuracy of 0.84. We run ApproxHDC for a 3-hour tuning budget against an accuracy cutoff and target of .79. The complete tuning time trace is shown in Figure 4. The best configuration sets 𝐷 =1024 , TRAINING_ITER =2,MLC =1, ADC_RES =8, ADC_STEP =2, ADC_FLOOR =−3,ADC_CEIL =128 , WRITE_VERIFY_CYCLES =0. This configu-ration achieves an accuracy of .8138. The majority of the 4.69 × speedup is driven by cutting training iterations from 10 to 2. While the SpecPCM hardware knobs (MLC, ADC resolution, ADC step, ADC floor, ADC ceiling) do not have a significant effect on performance, they do impact device energy usage. We did not tune for energy explicitly, the tuning objective was set to maximize runtime speedup, the tuner’s best-speedup configuration already achieves a 4.69 ×

energy reduction alongside its 4.69 × speedup, & we observed SpecPCM configurations that trade a small additional ac-curacy loss of .55% for significantly higher energy reduc-tion (up to 7.12 ×) by dropping ADC_RES from 8 to 6 & widening ADC_STEP to 9. Notably, the tuner converges on a strongly asymmetric ADC window: ADC_FLOOR rises from the baseline −127 to ∼ − 3 across all top configurations, while ADC_CEIL stays at 128. The SpecPCM simulator computes dot-product similarity over 128-element array chunks, with each partial dot product quantized by the ADC before ac-cumulation. At MLC =1 with ±1 encoded hypervectors, the partial sums for the correct class are predominantly positive (similar vectors yield positive inner products), while nega-tive partial sums appear mainly for non-matching classes. Clipping below −3 therefore preserves the classification out-come while narrowing the ADC input range. This narrower range allows fewer quantization levels (lower ADC_RES ,

Table 2. Approximate search-space sizes for each pruning configuration. Pruning reduces the space by up to 86 orders of magnitude (e.g., HD-Classification: 10 89 → 10 3). N/A indicates the configuration was not evaluated.                          

> Pruning Config. HD-Class. HD-Clust. RelHD HD-Hash.
> Full RedPerf 10 89 10 70 10 27 10 26
> End-only + hint 10 41 10 23 10 24 10 25
> No RedPerf 10 310 310 410 15
> Full RedPerf + hint 10 47 10 25 N/A N/A 0h00m 1h00m 2h00m 3h00m 4h00m 5h00m
> Time since start
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0
> 4.5
> Max speedup achieved (×)
> HD-Sim-Classification (max=4.69×)
> baseline (1×)

Figure 4. ApproxHDC hardware approximation tuning of the HD-Classification benchmark for the SpecPCM [ 8] Phase Change Memory simulator. ApproxHDC effectively achieves over 4.5x performance improvements within 45 minutes of tuning (and simulation) time. wider ADC_STEP ) to cover the active range, driving energy reduction. 

## 6 Related Work 

Compiler IR for Approximations. EnerJ [ 28 ] supports ap-proximate computing via type declarations that mark data as precise or approximate, enabling static analysis to isolate pre-cise and approximate code; hardware-level approximations include reduced DRAM refresh rates, lower SRAM voltage, and approximate floating-point operations. While effective for general-purpose applications, EnerJ’s design limits its applicability to domain-specific workloads such as HDC and does not support heterogeneous accelerator targets. Rely [ 4]provides a programming language and analysis framework that enables developers to specify quantitative reliability re-quirements for programs running on unreliable hardware (i.e., hardware where arithmetic operations or memory ac-cesses may fail with some probability). ApproxHPVM [ 29 ]and ApproxTuner [ 30 ] provide compiler- and runtime-level support for accuracy-aware approximations in deep learning and image processing. ApproxHPVM encodes per-operation error metrics in the HPVM IR and maps computations to ap-proximate hardware to meet end-to-end quality constraints. ApproxTuner extends this with a three-stage tuning frame-work that explores approximation-performance trade-offs at development, install, and runtime, achieving significant 

> 11

Xavier Routh, Abdul Rafae Noor, Akash Kothari, Zheyu Li, Mahbod Afarin, Tajana Rosing, and Vikram Adve 

speedups with minimal accuracy loss. Both frameworks are effective for functional, tensor-based workloads but do not directly support domain-specific paradigms like hyperdi-mensional computing (HDC), which require more intrusive approximation techniques to maintain acceptable quality-of-service given their inexpensive, non-backpropagation-based learning algorithms. 

Hyperdimensional Computing Approximation. Mi-croHD [ 25 ] is an accuracy-driven HDC optimization frame-work for TinyML and edge settings that explores a limited hyperparameter-based approximation space (e.g., dimension-ality, quantization, and encoding choices). It uses binary search and greedy methods to meet accuracy constraints while reducing resource usage, achieving up to 200–266 ×

savings with <1% accuracy loss. Built on TorchHD [ 10 ] with-out a compiler IR, it requires manual implementation of approximations and offers limited flexibility for application-or hardware-specific tuning. In contrast, our approach is extensible, as it automatically constructs the approximation space, allows the definition of custom application-specific tuning parameters with ease, and supports hardware approx-imation knobs not previously available, while also provid-ing compiler-based insertion and management of software-and hardware-level approximations across heterogeneous targets. [ 16 ] show that HDC can tolerate hardware-level ap-proximation using multi-bit FeFET in-memory computing, achieving software-equivalent accuracy with up to 826 × en-ergy and 30 × latency improvements. This demonstrates that HDC is resilient to approximate hardware execution, moti-vating compiler-based frameworks to systematically exploit such hardware knobs for performance and efficiency gains. 

## 7 Conclusion 

Hyperdimensional computing (HDC) is robust to approx-imation but hard to tune. We present ApproxHDC , an au-tomated framework that explores hardware and software approximations while optimizing QoS, with optional user guidance. Results show no single strategy consistently maxi-mizes speedup, highlighting the need for guided tuning. 

## References 

[1] Jason Ansel, Shoaib Kamil, Kalyan Veeramachaneni, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Jeffrey Bosboom, Una-May O’Reilly, and Saman Amarasinghe. 2014. OpenTuner: an extensible framework for program autotuning. In 

Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation (Edmonton, AB, Canada) (PACT ’14) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 303–316. doi: 10.1145/ 2628071.2628092 

[2] Russel Arbore, Xavier Routh, Abdul Rafae Noor, Akash Kothari, Haichao Yang, Weihong Xu, Sumukh Pinge, Minxuan Zhou, Tajana Rosing, and Vikram Adve. 2025. HPVM-HDC: A Heterogeneous Pro-gramming System for Accelerating Hyperdimensional Computing. In 

Proceedings of the 52nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1342–1355. doi: 10.1145/3695053.3731095 

[3] Fatemeh Asgarinejad, Anthony Thomas, and Tajana Rosing. 2020. De-tection of epileptic seizures from surface eeg using hyperdimensional computing. In 2020 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC) . IEEE, 536–540. [4] Michael Carbin, Sasa Misailovic, and Martin C. Rinard. 2013. Ver-ifying quantitative reliability for programs that execute on unreli-able hardware. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGPLAN Interna-tional Conference on Object Oriented Programming Systems Languages &amp; Applications (Indianapolis, Indiana, USA) (OOPSLA ’13) . As-sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 33–52. doi: 10.1145/2509136.2509546 

[5] En-Jui Chang, Abbas Rahimi, Luca Benini, and An-Yeu Andy Wu. 2019. Hyperdimensional computing-based multimodality emotion recogni-tion with physiological signals. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Artificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems (AICAS) . IEEE, 137–141. [6] Ron Cole and Mark Fanty. 1994. ISOLET. UCI Machine Learning Repository. DOI: https://doi.org/10.24432/C51G69. [7] Adel Ejjeh, Aaron Councilman, Akash Kothari, Maria Kotsifakou, Leon Medvinsky, Abdul Rafae Noor, Hashim Sharif, Yifan Zhao, Sarita Adve, Sasa Misailovic, et al . 2022. HPVM: Hardware-Agnostic Programming for Heterogeneous Parallel Systems. IEEE Micro 42, 5 (2022), 108–117. [8] Keming Fan, Ashkan Moradifirouzabadi, Xiangjin Wu, Zheyu Li, Flavio Ponzina, Anton Persson, Eric Pop, Tajana Rosing, and Mingu Kang. 2024. SpecPCM: A Low-Power PCM-Based In-Memory Com-puting Accelerator for Full-Stack Mass Spectrometry Analysis. IEEE Journal on Exploratory Solid-State Computational Devices and Circuits 

10 (2024), 161–169. doi: 10.1109/JXCDC.2024.3498837 

[9] Yunhui Guo, Mohsen Imani, Jaeyoung Kang, Sahand Salamat, Justin Morris, Baris Aksanli, Yeseong Kim, and Tajana Rosing. 2021. Hyper-rec: Efficient recommender systems with hyperdimensional comput-ing. In Proceedings of the 26th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference . 384–389. [10] Mike Heddes, Igor Nunes, Pere Vergés, Denis Kleyko, Danny Abraham, Tony Givargis, Alexandru Nicolau, and Alexander Veidenbaum. 2023. Torchhd: An Open Source Python Library to Support Research on Hyperdimensional Computing and Vector Symbolic Architectures. arXiv:2205.09208 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.09208 

[11] Mohsen Imani, Yeseong Kim, Thomas Worley, Saransh Gupta, and Tajana Rosing. 2019. HDCluster: An Accurate Clustering Using Brain-Inspired High-Dimensional Computing. In 2019 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) . 1591–1594. doi: 10. 23919/DATE.2019.8715147 

[12] Mohsen Imani, Deqian Kong, Abbas Rahimi, and Tajana Rosing. 2017. Voicehd: Hyperdimensional computing for efficient speech recogni-tion. In 2017 IEEE international conference on rebooting computing (ICRC) . IEEE, 1–8. [13] Pentti Kanerva. 2009. Hyperdimensional computing: An introduction to computing in distributed representation with high-dimensional random vectors. Cognitive computation 1 (2009), 139–159. [14] Jaeyoung Kang, You Hak Lee, Minxuan Zhou, Weihong Xu, and Tajana Rosing. 2024. HygHD: Hyperdimensional Hypergraph Learning. In 

2024 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) . 1–6. doi: 10.23919/DATE58400.2024.10546871 

[15] Jaeyoung Kang, Minxuan Zhou, Abhinav Bhansali, Weihong Xu, An-thony Thomas, and Tajana Rosing. 2022. RelHD: A Graph-based Learning on FeFET with Hyperdimensional Computing. In 2022 IEEE 40th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD) . 553–560. doi: 10.1109/ICCD56317.2022.00087 

[16] Arman Kazemi, Franz Müller, Mohammad Mehdi Sharifi, Hamza Errahmouni, Gerald Gerlach, Thomas Kämpfe, Mohsen Imani, Xiaobo Sharon Hu, and Michael Niemier. 2022. Achieving software-equivalent accuracy for hyperdimensional computing with ferroelectric-based in-memory computing. Scientific reports 12, 1 (2022), 19201. 12 Compiler-Driven Approximation Tuning for Hyperdimensional Computing 

[17] Yeseong Kim, Mohsen Imani, Niema Moshiri, and Tajana Rosing. 2020. Geniehd: Efficient dna pattern matching accelerator using hyperdi-mensional computing. In 2020 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) . IEEE, 115–120. [18] Denis Kleyko, Dmitri A. Rachkovskij, Evgeny Osipov, and Abbas Rahimi. 2022. A Survey on Hyperdimensional Computing aka Vector Symbolic Architectures, Part I: Models and Data Transformations. 

ACM Comput. Surv. 55, 6, Article 130 (Dec. 2022), 40 pages. doi: 10. 1145/3538531 

[19] Maria Kotsifakou, Prakalp Srivastava, Matthew D Sinclair, Rakesh Ko-muravelli, Vikram Adve, and Sarita Adve. 2018. Hpvm: Heterogeneous parallel virtual machine. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGPLAN Sym-posium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming . 68–80. [20] Haitong Li, Wei-Chen Chen, Akash Levy, Ching-Hua Wang, Hongjie Wang, Po-Han Chen, Weier Wan, Win-San Khwa, Harry Chuang, Y.-D. Chih, Meng-Fan Chang, H.-S. Philip Wong, and Priyanka Raina. 2021. SAPIENS: A 64-kb RRAM-Based Non-Volatile Associative Memory for One-Shot Learning and Inference at the Edge. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 68, 12 (2021), 6637–6643. doi: 10.1109/TED.2021. 3110464 

[21] A.K. McCallum. 2000. Automating the construction of internet portals with machine learning. Information Retrieval 3 (01 2000), 127–163. [22] Anton Mitrokhin, P Sutor, Cornelia Fermüller, and Yiannis Aloimonos. 2019. Learning sensorimotor control with neuromorphic sensors: Toward hyperdimensional active perception. Science Robotics 4, 30 (2019), eaaw6736. [23] Igor Nunes, Mike Heddes, Tony Givargis, Alexandru Nicolau, and Alex Veidenbaum. 2022. GraphHD: Efficient graph classification using hyperdimensional computing. In 2022 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) . IEEE, 1485–1490. [24] Flavio Ponzina. 2024. MicroHD. https://github.com/flavio-ponzina/ MicroHD . Accessed: 2026-04-16. [25] Flavio Ponzina and Tajana Rosing. 2024. MicroHD: An Accuracy-Driven Optimization of Hyperdimensional Computing Algorithms for TinyML systems. arXiv:2404.00039 [cs.PF] https://arxiv.org/abs/2404. 00039 

[26] Abbas Rahimi, Simone Benatti, Pentti Kanerva, Luca Benini, and Jan M Rabaey. 2016. Hyperdimensional biosignal processing: A case study for EMG-based hand gesture recognition. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Rebooting Computing (ICRC) . IEEE, 1–8. [27] Abbas Rahimi, Pentti Kanerva, and Jan M Rabaey. 2016. A robust and energy-efficient classifier using brain-inspired hyperdimensional computing. In Proceedings of the 2016 international symposium on low power electronics and design . 64–69. [28] Adrian Sampson, Werner Dietl, Emily Fortuna, Danushen Gnanapra-gasam, Luis Ceze, and Dan Grossman. 2011. EnerJ: approximate data types for safe and general low-power computation. SIGPLAN Not. 46, 6 (June 2011), 164–174. doi: 10.1145/1993316.1993518 

[29] Hashim Sharif, Prakalp Srivastava, Muhammad Huzaifa, Maria Kotsi-fakou, Keyur Joshi, Yasmin Sarita, Nathan Zhao, Vikram S. Adve, Sasa Misailovic, and Sarita Adve. 2019. ApproxHPVM: a portable compiler IR for accuracy-aware optimizations. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 3, OOPSLA, Article 186 (Oct. 2019), 30 pages. doi: 10.1145/3360612 

[30] Hashim Sharif, Yifan Zhao, Maria Kotsifakou, Akash Kothari, Ben Schreiber, Elizabeth Wang, Yasmin Sarita, Nathan Zhao, Keyur Joshi, Vikram S. Adve, Sasa Misailovic, and Sarita Adve. 2021. Approx-Tuner: a compiler and runtime system for adaptive approximations. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (Virtual Event, Republic of Korea) 

(PPoPP ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 262–277. doi: 10.1145/3437801.3446108 

[31] Weihong Xu, Jaeyoung Kang, and Tajana Rosing. 2023. FSL-HD: Accelerating Few-Shot Learning on ReRAM using Hyperdimensional Computing. In 2023 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE) . 1–6. doi: 10.23919/DATE56975.2023.10136901 

[32] Tinaqi Zhang, Sahand Salamat, Behnam Khaleghi, Justin Morris, Baris Aksanli, and Tajana Simunic Rosing. 2023. HD2FPGA: Automated Framework for Accelerating Hyperdimensional Computing on FPGAs. In 2023 24th International Symposium on Quality Electronic Design (ISQED) . 1–9. doi: 10.1109/ISQED57927.2023.10129332 

[33] Zhuowen Zou, Hanning Chen, Prathyush Poduval, Yeseong Kim, Mahdi Imani, Elaheh Sadredini, Rosario Cammarota, and Mohsen Imani. 2022. BioHD: an efficient genome sequence search platform using HyperDimensional memorization. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (New York, New York) (ISCA ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 656–669. doi: 10.1145/3470496.3527422 

13