Title: An Instruction Set Architecture for IMPLY-based Memristive Processing-in-Array

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.27319v1

Published Time: Fri, 26 Jun 2026 01:21:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 61

Markdown Content:
# An Instruction Set Architecture for IMPLY-based Memristive Processing-in-Array 

Liam Splittgerber a, Fabian Seiler a,b, ∗, Nima TaheriNejad a,b 

> aTechnische Universität Wien (TU Wien), Vienna, Austria
> bInstitute of Computer Engineering (ZITI), Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract 

The push towards expanded ultra-low-power edge computing necessitates hardware capable of operating under extremely strict energy constraints. Traditional Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS) microcon-trollers are fundamentally limited in this domain by the von Neumann bottle-neck and by the static power leakage inherent to volatile memory. Memristive In-Memory Computing (IMC) offers a promising solution to these inefficien-cies by unifying data storage and computation into a single non-volatile component. However, the State of the Art (SoA) predominantly focuses on accelerators designed to be a co-processor for data-intensive computation. This leaves the prospect of standalone, general-purpose IMC microcontroller architectures underexplored. This thesis proposes such an architecture tai-lored for ultra-low-power edge devices, alongside an instruction set closely derived from the RV32I standard. Using the IMPLY stateful logic paradigm, a complete implementation of the proposed instruction set is provided, and the novel addressing schema required to support computation in the mem-ristive crossbar array is described as well. Then, the energy use and other circuit-level metrics of the proposed architecture are evaluated through sim-ulation and compared against those of traditional microcontrollers. Finally, the functional viability of the design is demonstrated through an application case study, describing how the proposed design could be used in an intelligent environmental sensor node.     

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email addresses: e62102646@student.tuwien.ac.at (Liam Splittgerber),
> fabian.seiler@ziti.uni-heidelberg.de (Fabian Seiler),
> nima.taherinejad@ziti.uni-heidelberg.de (Nima TaheriNejad)
> arXiv:2606.27319v1 [cs.ET] 25 Jun 2026

1. Introduction 

As modern computation becomes more and more data-driven, edge com-puting has proliferated in an attempt to move computation closer to sources of data. Many such edge computing applications demand ultra-low-power computation, with devices operating under extremely strict energy con-straints [1]. The workloads of these devices typically consist of sporadic data collection and lightweight local preprocessing, followed by extended pe-riods of dormancy. To meet these demands, attention is increasingly focused on exploring new computing paradigms and emerging technologies that can support these strict power constraints. Currently, traditional microcontrollers based on Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS) technology are the predominant option for low-power edge devices. However, they struggle to improve on power per-formance, as they all share the underlying problem of the von Neumann bottleneck [2]. Executing even the simplest computations requires moving data back and forth across a power-intensive memory bus, a process that consumes significantly more energy than the computation itself [3]. Addi-tionally, CMOS microcontrollers rely on volatile memory, meaning they suffer from continuous static power leakage during even their idle state, which is where many edge devices spend much of their operational lifespan. Follow-ing the philosophy of moving computation closer to data, In-Memory Com-puting (IMC) represents an emerging approach for performing computation directly within memory, offering a potential solution to the problems faced by traditional microcontrollers [3]. The memristor stands out as an ideal candidate for IMC memory cells, with its capability to store data through its resistive state [4] and perform logical operations natively [5]. Additional attributes, such as non-volatility and a highly compact form factor, further position memristors as a promising foundation for ultra-low-power edge ar-chitectures. Several developments have been made in recent years in the realm of IMC architectures based on memristive crossbar arrays. The fo-cus of much of this work has been on exploiting the properties of memristive crossbars to develop State of the Art (SoA) accelerator architectures capable of high-throughput vectorized computation [6, 7]. However, little work exists proposing completely standalone memristive architectures equipped with a complete Instruction Set Architecture (ISA). Here, we propose a standalone IMC architecture that expands on SoA con-cepts to provide a comprehensive, general-purpose foundation for ultra-low-power edge devices. We use a design approach aimed at adapting the stan-dard RISC–V ISA to run natively on the proposed architecture. As RISC–V 2is a widely adopted standard, this approach allows for an ISA that remains close to an existing familiar ecosystem, potentially easing the adoption of the proposed architecture. We handle the challenge of mapping a fundamentally load-store instruction set onto a memristive environment by introducing a novel “address bank” schema. This overcomes traditional register limita-tions, enabling static and dynamic addressing of a large two-dimensional memory space while simultaneously exploiting the vector parallelism inher-ent to crossbar arrays. This thesis is organized into six sections. An overview of the content of the individual sections and how they interact is detailed below. After the introduction in this section, we will review the literature and provide the necessary background information for this thesis in section 2. This includes an overview of memristors, IMPLY and other stateful logic paradigms, and the RISC–V ISA. In section 3, we propose the hardware architecture and methodology. We introduce the component parts of the design: the cross-bar array, system memory, and control logic. Then, we detail the necessary modifications made to the RISC–V ISA to make it compatible with the pro-posed design. In section 4, following the architectural constraints outlined in the previous section, we present the low-level implementation of the in-struction set. We provide the specific IMPLY algorithms required to execute each operation. In section 7, the proposed architecture is evaluated on the circuit-level using the ATOMIC simulation framework [8]. Afterward, the capabilities of the proposed design are exemplified through a case study. We show how the design could be used in an environmental sensor node and validate the functional completeness and ultra-low-power capabilities of the proposed architecture. We finally conclude this thesis in section 8, where we summarize the primary gains, reiterate the novel architectural concepts introduced, and outline potential trajectories for future research. 

2. Literature Review 

2.1. Memristors 

In 1971, L. Chua theorized the existence of a fourth fundamental passive circuit element, often referred to as the “missing circuit element” [4]. This proposition was founded on the mathematical symmetry among the four fundamental circuit variables: current i, voltage v, charge q, and flux link-age φ. Combinatorially, there are six possible pairwise relationships among these four variables. However, prior to Chua’s formulation, only five of these relationships were established within classical circuit theory: 31. Charge-Current: q(t) = R t 

> −∞

i(τ )dτ 

2. Flux-Voltage: φ(t) = R t 

> −∞

v(τ )dτ 

3. Voltage-Current (Resistor): dv = R · di 

4. Charge-Voltage (Capacitor): dq = C · dv 

5. Flux-Current (Inductor): dφ = L · di 

The first two equations represent the fundamental time-integral defini-tions linking charge with current, and flux linkage with voltage. The last three equations define the relations of the three classical two-terminal pas-sive components: the resistor, the capacitor, and the inductor, respectively. The sixth and final mathematical permutation dictates a direct constitutive relationship between flux linkage and electrical charge. Chua hypothesized that a fourth fundamental two-terminal component must exist to satisfy this theoretical gap. He termed this device the memristor , using the standard circuit symbol shown in Figure 1. 

> Figure 1: Circuit symbol of the memristor proposed in [4]

The memristor is characterized by M , or its memristivity, which is given by the rate of change in flux as it relates to charge ( M (q) = dφ dq [4]). The units of memristivity are Ohms ( Ω), but crucially, it is not a static resistance; it depends on the charge, and by extension, the history of the current that has flowed through it [4]. This dependence on the history of current flow is characterized by a hysteresis loop with two distinct stable states: a minimum 

Ron and a maximum Rof f (see Figure 2). It is this bi-stable nature that makes memristors usable as a digital mem-ory cell, where its resistive state represents its logical state. In the litera-ture, it is convention to designate the resistive state Ron as a logical ‘1’ and 

Rof f as a logical ‘0’ [9]. Furthermore, since the memristor’s state does not change when no current flows, this memory capability is non-volatile as well. 4Voltage [V] 

> Current [A]
> RON
> ROFF Figure 2: Theoretical ideal model of a memristor [4, 5]

All this, along with their demonstrated compatibility with CMOS manufac-turing methods [10], has made memristors a promising emerging memory technology. 

2.2. Stateful Logic and IMPLY 

In addition to the memristor’s memory capability, their ability to facili-tate computation in the form of stateful logic is of great interest as well. In traditional CMOS logic (not stateful), the output of some logical circuitry depends only on the currently driven inputs. If the inputs stop being driven, the information is lost, i.e. there is no recoverable state. Memristors, on the other hand, allow for stateful logic. In memristive stateful logic, the phys-ical state of a memristor dictates its logical state, and driving a collection of memristors in a specific way can update their states according to some logical combination of their initial states [5]. The memristors act as both the storage of a logical state and as the components of a logic gate. Several stateful logic paradigms have been proposed to realize this be-havior, each utilizing different fundamental logical primitives. The most prominent include MAGIC, which uses a NOR primitive, and FELIX, which uses a number of different single-cycle primitives (NOR, NOT, Min, NAND, and OR) [11, 12]. There is also the IMPLY paradigm, based on an impli-cation primitive, which in conjunction with the ability to reset memristors, 5forms a complete logic set [5, 9]. This work uses the IMPLY paradigm, as it has proven to be the most stable approach, making it most resilient to the non-idealities of memristors [13]. VCOND VSET 

## p q

## RG

## p q p q

## 0 0 1

## 0 1 1

## 1 0 0

## 1 1 1

> Figure 3: The IMPLY logic gate using memristors

Performing such a logical implication is done as shown in Figure 3. The bottom terminals of both operand memristors p and q are connected to the same wire along with a resistor R G (where R on ≪ RG ≪ Rof f ). The top terminals of memristors p and q are connected to wires that are pulsed with voltages V CON D and V SET , respectively. After the voltage pulses are applied, memristor p remains unchanged ( p′ = p) and the result of the logical implication overwrites the value on memristor q (q′ = p → q). Along with the logical implication, a “False” operation is required as well. Resetting a memristor to its false state is done by pulsing it with the V RESET voltage. 

2.3. Crossbar Arrays 

In order to scale the capabilities of a single IMPLY gate, memristors can be integrated into a high-density crossbar array. This structure, shown in Figure 4, consists of a set of perpendicular row and column wires, with a memristor situated at each intersection. This topology is well suited for IM-PLY operations because it allows the shared row wire to act as the common node for the IMPLY gate [14, 5]. The resistor RG is connected to the end of each row, while the necessary voltages ( VCON D and VSET ) are applied with the drivers at the top of each column. Not shown in the figure are transistors that sit in series with each memristor, whose gates are connected to a set of 6row lines that act as a “row select”. This is known as a One-Transistor-One-Resistor (1T1R) array. When a row is “active”, an IMPLY operation can be applied to any arbitrary pair of memristors on that row. This is known as the serial topology. Since logic is performed bit-serially, one IMPLY step can be executed at a time within a single row. 

> Figure 4: Memristive crossbar array for the serial topology

Using the serial topology of a crossbar array also provides huge paral-lelism capabilities. As shown in Figure 5, since the voltage pulses are applied to entire columns simultaneously, an IMPLY step can be performed across any number of rows in parallel without incurring any additional latency. 

2.4. Memristive IMC 

The integration of stateful logic into memristive crossbar arrays provides an ideal substrate for developing IMC architectures that avoid the von Neu-mann bottleneck. In traditional computer architectures, the majority of 7p q

# VCOND VSET 

# p

# p

# q

# qFigure 5: IMPLY operation across n rows 

the power used is solely for transferring data between computational and memory units [2, 3]. This fundamental bottleneck has generated a great deal of interest in computer architectures where the data never has to leave memory, and can be processed directly where the data resides. Using mem-ristive crossbar arrays allows for just that. Data is stored in high-density memristive arrays, and stateful logic paradigms, such as IMPLY, allow for arbitrary computations within the array. Many such architectures have been proposed, for example RACER [6]. The RACER architecture is a scalable in-memory architecture that is designed to execute bit-pipelined bit-serial logic. In RACER, each bit of an n-bit data word is stored in n separate small crossbar-arrays (called tiles). In order to accommodate computational patterns where data from neighboring bits is required (such as the carry bit in adders), small buffers between each tile are introduced. This allows for pipelining of operations, sacrificing as little throughput as possible. RACER is primarily designed to function as an accelerator or co-processor to aid in data-intensive applications (such as neural network inference, or image processing) rather than a standalone general-purpose processor. Another significant development in digital IMC is the AritPIM frame-work [7]. AritPIM establishes a comprehensive algorithmic foundation for 8high throughput in-memory arithmetic. It provides a SoA suite of algo-rithms for all four fundamental arithmetic operations (addition, subtrac-tion, multiplication, and division), supporting both fixed and floating-point math. AritPIM achieves high throughput by exploiting element-parallel ex-ecution across memory rows, introducing novel data-flow techniques, such as in-memory logarithmic shifting and binary-search-inspired normalization. While AritPIM provides the blueprints for high throughput computation in memristive crossbars, the performance of its algorithms are compared against a traditional GPU, indicating its intended use for accelerator hardware, not a standalone IMC architecture. RACER and AritPIM are not alone in this regard, and research in mem-ristive computer architectures exhibits a distinct trend: the focus is primar-ily on accelerator designs. These designs are implemented as co-processors that reside on a traditional system bus, intended to offload data-intensive tasks from a conventional CPU. In these designs, the CPU still handles the high-level program flow, while the memristive array is treated as a high-throughput, low-power computational slave. Little work exists proposing standalone architectures complete with a fully-equipped instruction set. 

2.5. The RISC–V Instruction Set Architecture 

Designing a general-purposed architecture involves the use of an ISA that defines the relationship between high-level software and the low-level hardware. An ISA is a specification that provides a list of operations that the processor must be able to execute and how exactly it should do so. RISC– V has emerged as the predominant ISA for academic research and novel hardware architectures due to the fact that it is an open standard and is designed for modularity and extensibility [15]. The base integer instruction set, RV32I, defines a minimal, Turing-complete set of operations intended for simple architectures. The RISC–V architecture follows a load-store paradigm, operating on data residing in a register file [15]. This means that computation is typically performed in the following pattern: first, load instructions fetch data from memory into registers; then, the CPU performs boolean or arithmetic opera-tions on data in the register file; and finally, the resulting data is stored back to memory using store instructions. To sequence which computations happen when, control flow instructions determine the execution order of the program. All of these load, process, store, and control flow instructions belong to one of six instruction formats, as shown in Figure 6. Each instruction format has an opcode field, which acts as the identifier, telling the CPU what opera-tion should be performed. Certain formats include funct3 or funct7 fields, 9R-type funct7 rs2 rs1 funct3 rd opcode                                       

> imm[11 ̀0] rs1 funct3 rd opcode I-type
> rs2 rs1 funct3 imm[11 ̀5] imm[4 ̀0] opcode S-type
> rs2 rs1 funct3 imm[12,10 ̀5] imm[4 ̀1,11] opcode B-type
> imm[31 ̀12] U-type rd opcode
> imm[20,10 ̀1,11,19 ̀12] J-type rd opcode
> 31 ̀25 24 ̀20 19 ̀15 14 ̀12 11 ̀76̀0Figure 6: RV32I instruction formats

which further clarify the desired operation. The six instruction formats are as follows: 1. R-type (register-register): These instructions read data from two source registers ( rs1 and rs2 ), perform a boolean or arithmetic operation, and store the result to a destination register ( rd ). 2. I-type (immediate): These instructions source one operand from the 

rs1 register, and the other directly from the 12-bit imm field. There are two subtypes of I-type instructions. First, there are immediate versions of many R-type instructions; these are functionally identical to the R-type version, with the exception of the second operand source. The second subtype consists of load instructions. Here, the rs1 field holds the base address and the imm field represents an offset; the data at the calculated address is loaded into the rd register. 3. S-type (store): S-type instructions read a word of data found in the 

rs2 register, and stores it to the memory address defined by the rs1 

base address and imm offset. 4. B-type (branch): These are control flow instructions that update the program counter (PC) based on a condition. The values in rs1 and 

rs2 are compared in some way, and if the comparison evaluates to ’true’, the program counter is incremented by the offset found in the 

imm field. If the comparison evaluates to ’false’, the program counter is incremented as normal. These instructions are used to implement if-else and loop behavior. 10 5. U-type (upper immediate): These instructions have a large 20-bit imm 

field, and are employed when a 12-bit immediate value is insufficient. 6. J-type (jump): J-type instructions are similar to B-type instructions, except they are unconditional. The value in the program counter is incremented and then stored to the rd register. Then, the program counter is set to the value in the imm field. This is the behavior of calling a function after storing the return address. While the load-store paradigm that RISC–V uses has defined traditional computer architectures, it is in conflict with the principles of stateful IMC. Adapting the RISC–V ISA into a memristive environment, where data move-ment is eliminated and operands are not sourced from a small register file, is the central challenge addressed in the subsequent sections of this work. 

3. Methodology 

3.1. Proposed Architecture 3.1.1. Overview 

Driven by the stringent energy constraints of modern edge computing ap-plications, the primary motivation for this design is to eliminate the power-intensive data movement and static power needs inherent to traditional von Neumann systems. To achieve this ultra-low-power computational profile, the proposed architecture is based on a memristive crossbar array, where data is stored and computation is performed. The execution of all instructions is orchestrated by a control logic unit. This unit is responsible for the complete instruction execution flow, including fetching/decoding instructions and ap-plying the precise voltage sequences to the crossbar array to perform the desired computation. For the purposes of this thesis, the control logic is treated as a functional block, and its exact internal implementation is ab-stracted. The scope of this work is therefore in part to define what the control logic must be able to do to correctly execute instructions rather than to specify exactly how it does so. 

3.1.2. Architecture-level Model 

The proposed IMC architecture is shown schematically in Figure 7. At a high level, the system is partitioned into three primary functional blocks: the crossbar array, the control logic, and the system memory. The crossbar array serves as the combined data storage and computational medium, while the system memory holds the program and configuration data. The control 11 logic orchestrates the entire process, interfacing with both memory structures to execute instructions. The following subsections provide a more detailed examination of each of these components and their roles. Crossbar Array Crossbar Array Crossbar Array Crossbar Arrays Data Work Memristors 512 bits 8 bits Column Decoder Row Decoder & Sense Amplifiers Control Logic Program Counter 512 bits System Memory Program Memory (512x32) Address Bank (32x32) CSR Bank (32x32)  

> μ-OP Cache IO Register (1x32) Peripheral Sensor

Figure 7: Architecture of the crossbar array-based computer 

The foundation of this in-memory architecture is the memristive cross-bar array . Each memristor in the crossbar array holds a single bit of data by representing its logical state as the resistive state of the memristor, where a high resistance state (R of f ) represents a logical ‘0’ and a low resistance state (R on ) a logical ‘1’. To form multi-bit words, data is stored as contiguous blocks of memristors that are all situated on the same row. Computation on this data is done by composing sequences of IMPLY steps. Executing multi-step algorithms requires a place to store intermedi-ate results, especially since the IMPLY operation is destructive by nature, overwriting one of its inputs. To address this, each row in the crossbar array is augmented with a set of dedicated work memristors. These memristors function as a scratchpad, holding the output of one logical step so it can be used as an input for another. Furthermore, they enable non-destructive computation; by first copying an operand to a work memristor, an algorithm can perform an operation without sacrificing the original input data, which may be needed for subsequent calculations. Having established the architectural purposes of both a main data region and a dedicated set of work memristors on each row, the specific dimensions 12 for these partitions in the proposed design can be defined. The crossbar array was chosen to have 512 ×512 memristors for the main data region plus a 512 ×8 section reserved for work memristors. This size was chosen as it represents a fairly large, but reasonably attainable crossbar array consider-ing current technology scaling forecasts [6]. While fabricating even larger arrays is a significant research goal, practical limits are imposed by physical challenges like the resistance introduced by long wires, which can degrade the reliability of IMPLY operations. Since the size of one array is limited, the design includes multiple crossbar arrays, all connected to the same control logic, allowing the storage capacity of the sensor node to be arbitrarily scaled. To allow for this, the control logic keeps a register with the ID of the currently active array and only executes instructions in this array. To switch to a new array when the active one is full, the control logic counts how many instructions have been executed, and when this reaches a predefined threshold, the array ID is incremented. The system memory is an additional storage element that holds all the information that the control logic will need to execute instructions and infor-mation about the system’s state. Unlike the crossbar array, no computation is performed on the data held in the system memory. Despite this, the system memory is still implemented as a memristive crossbar array. This choice is twofold: first, it leverages the same memristive fabrication process required for the main computational array, promoting a unified and potentially more cost-effective manufacturing approach. Second, by using non-volatile stor-age for all major memory components, the design reinforces its suitability for ultra-low-power applications. The system memory is comprised of four distinct sub-components. 1. The program memory is a dedicated 512 ×32 bit section responsi-ble for storing the instructions that are to be executed. It can hold up to 512 32-bit instructions. It is given 512 rows to align with the dimensions of the main crossbar array, simplifying the manufacturing process. However, it should be noted that because the program mem-ory is a read-only structure during execution, it is not subject to the strict voltage margins required for IMPLY operations. The voltage used to read from a memristive crossbar array (V READ ) is deliberately kept small to avoid writing to the cell, so the resistance introduced by longer wires is less of a concern. The sense amplifiers used to read from the system memory are very sensitive and can tolerate more noise. This means the program memory can theoretically be larger to accom-modate more complex program code. 13 2. The address bank holds information that the control logic uses to target the desired data in the crossbar array. Its exact function is described in more detail in Section 3.2.2. 3. The control and status bank serves as an analog to the control and status registers in RISC-V. The RISC-V architecture specifies 4096 dif-ferent registers for this purpose, but only a few are required for basic interrupt and trap handling [15]. These registers include mstatus ,which tracks the interrupt state and privilege levels; mtvec , which holds the address of the trap handler in the program memory; mepc ,which saves the address of the instruction that caused a trap so execu-tion can resume later; and mcause , which indicates the specific reason an exception or interrupt occurred. More control and status registers could be implemented, but this only has implications for exact imple-mentation details of the control logic and is thus beyond the scope of this work. 4. Finally, the μ-OP cache serves as a translation layer between the in-struction set and the hardware. This lookup-table stores the sequences of IMPLY steps (called micro-operations) required to execute each in-struction specified by the instruction set. When an instruction is to be executed, the control logic references this cache to retrieve the specific sequence of voltage pulses to apply to the crossbar array’s columns to perform the desired computation. The control logic serves as the orchestrator of the architecture, bridging the gap between the program code and the computation within the crossbar array. It is responsible for the timing, communication, and driving of all system components. At a high level, the control flow that the design uses to execute instructions is shown in Figure 8. The primary section is labeled as control logic in Figure 7, and it rep-resents all the abstracted components of the control logic. It fetches in-structions from the program memory, decodes them, and then performs the desired computation in the crossbar array according to the sequence of IM-PLY steps found in the μ-OP cache. To determine which instruction is to be executed, the control logic reads from a subcomponent: the PC , which sim-ply stores the location of the next instruction to be executed in the program memory as a 32-bit value. It is implemented as a traditional volatile register instead of as a memristive storage element for two reasons. First, the PC is incremented every clock cycle, and since no data movement is involved, it is still much more energy efficient in traditional CMOS logic. Second, 14 non-volatility is not a required feature for the program counter, as it gets reset back to zero each time the program is run. Also contained within the control logic is the IO register . This register allows the design to ingest data from the external environment via the peripheral sensor. Peripherals can write to this register and trigger an interrupt, telling the design to copy its contents to the crossbar array. Additionally, this register can be used to read out the contents of the array to the external world. Decode 

Fetch   

> Start
> Fetch Insn
> at PC Instruction
> Program
> Memory
> PC Value

Execute           

> Read OP-code &
> other fields
> Read
> Address
> Config
> Fetch
> μ-OPs
> Read
> IO-Reg
> Read
> Immediate
> Value
> Address
> Bank
> μ-OP
> Cache
> Read PC
> Sign/Zero
> Extend
> In-Array
> IO
> Address Bank
> Branch
> Jump Execution
> Type
> Apply μ-OP
> Sequence
> Evaluate Branch
> Condition
> Write to
> IO-Reg
> Write to
> Address Bank
> Store Return
> Address
> Increment PC Write Target
> Address to PC
> End
> Memristive Storage Element
> Read/Write Operation
> Control Logic Process

Figure 8: Control flow of the architecture 

Finally, the interface between the control logic and the crossbar array is handled by the row and column decoders and sense amplifiers . The decoders are implemented as demultiplexers, translating an address encoded as a binary value into a signal on the specific row and column lines corre-15 sponding to the encoded address. Integrated into the Row Decoders are the Sense Amplifiers, which read the state of memristors by applying a small voltage (V READ ) to the desired memristor, detecting the current flow, and converting the current to digital logic values. Notably, as depicted in Figure 7, the column decoders do not extend to the work memristor portion of the array. This is to indicate that these are not directly addressable by software instructions. Still, the control logic is able to apply voltage pulses to the work memristors to facilitate intermediate steps during the IMPLY-based computations. 

3.2. Adapting the RISC-V ISA 

This architecture implements a modified version of the RV32I base integer instruction set of the RISC-V standard. The primary goal in developing the instruction set architecture for the proposed design was to adapt the RV32I instruction set to the constraints and advantages of the IMC paradigm while preserving the familiarity of the RISC-V standard as much as possible. This section first starts with an overview of the RISC-V standard, then explains and justifies the changes made. 

3.2.1. Modifications to the RV32I Instruction Set 

The goal in designing the instruction set was to adhere as closely as possible to the RISC-V specification, in order to more easily adapt existing compilers for the purposes of compiling code for the design. However, some deviations are required or desirable to accommodate the IMC paradigm and its advantages. These modifications fall into three categories: the omission of memory access instructions, the introduction of new architecture-specific instructions, and fundamental changes to data-processing instructions re-garding operand usage and parallelism. 

Omitted Memory Access Instructions The most distinct feature of this instruction set architecture is the complete omission of non-immediate load and store instructions (e.g., lw , sw , lb ). In a traditional von Neumann architecture, these instructions shuttle data between main memory and the register file. However, in this in-memory architecture, all operands reside either within the crossbar array or as an immediate value in the program memory; there is no external RAM to load from or store to. Eliminating these instructions removes the overhead of data movement, realizing the primary energy-saving goal of the design. The only load instructions that are kept are those that handle compile-time constants. The Load Upper Immediate ( lui ) instruction is re-tained. Additionally, the Load Immediate ( li ) pseudo-instruction, which 16 in RISC-V is executed by involving an adder (e.g., addi rd, x0, imm ), is implemented here as a native hardware instruction. Using an adder simply to load a constant is inefficient in a memristive environment; implement-ing li as a dedicated instruction allows the control logic to write constants directly to the crossbar array with minimal energy use. 

New Architecture-Specific Instructions As will be explained in de-tail in Section 3.2.2, in order for the control logic to know where an operand is in the crossbar array, some addressing information must already be present in the address bank. Thus, three new instructions that deal with the address bank are introduced. Note that these are designated as “load” instructions, but they function differently than standard RISC-V memory operations. 1. Load Address ( la ): This instruction reads a word of data from the crossbar array and loads it to a specified slot in the address bank. This allows the program to dynamically update addresses based on values calculated in the crossbar array. The instruction needs an rd 

field to designate which slot of the address bank to store the address to. Additionally, it needs an rs1 field to specify which word in the crossbar array should be loaded. No further fields are needed, so this instruction is encoded as an I-type instruction, where the immediate value is simply ignored. 2. Load Address Upper Immediate ( laui ): Without some preexist-ing entries in the address bank, the control logic has no way to begin targeting operands in the crossbar array. Thus, there must be some way to load an immediate value into the address bank. Hence, laui 

is introduced. It loads a 20-bit immediate value into the upper bits of the address slot designated by the rd field. It is encoded as a U-type instruction to accommodate the large immediate value. 3. Load Address Immediate ( lai ): Along with laui , an instruction is needed to populate the remaining lower 12 bits of an address slot. Hence, lai is introduced, which loads a 12-bit immediate value into the lower 12 bits of the address slot designated by the rd field. It is encoded as an I-type instruction, where the rs1 field is ignored. Collectively, these three instructions provide the complete functionality required to address the crossbar array; however, two final instructions are needed to allow the system to receive and send data from the external envi-ronment. Since the architecture is designed for edge-computing applications 17 such as sensor nodes, it requires a way to ingest data from external peripher-als. Hence, Load from IO Register ( lio ) is introduced. This instruction transfers a 32-bit value from a dedicated register (that peripherals can popu-late) to a location in the crossbar array, enabling the processing of externally sourced data. It is encoded as an R-type instruction, with the rs1 field point-ing to the address in the crossbar array where the value should be stored to, and all other fields being ignored. Lastly, since the data in the crossbar array must eventually be read out, the instruction Store to IO Register (sio ) is introduced. This instruction moves a 32-bit value from the crossbar array into the IO register, and is also encoded as an R-type instruction the same way as lio .

Global Changes to Data-Processing Instructions Finally, the execu-tion for all arithmetic and boolean instructions differs from the RISC-V standard in two ways: 1. Two-Operand Convention: Standard RISC-V uses a three-operand format ( rd = rs1 op rs2 ). In contrast, this architecture uses a two-operand, destructive write convention where the result overwrites the second input ( rs2 = rs1 op rs2 ). While exceptions exist (detailed in section 4), this approach was chosen because it is memristor and energy-efficient. Preserving both inputs of a memristive computa-tion requires copying data to new columns, consuming additional work memristors and IMPLY steps. This also aligns with common compu-tational patterns, such as accumulation (e.g. sum += value ), where the original value of the destination operand is no longer required. If input preservation is absolutely necessary, the relevant input must be copied to new columns prior to the instruction. 2. Native Parallelism: The design’s addressing scheme leverages the massive parallelism inherent to computing in crossbar arrays with the serial topology. This vectorization comes at zero cost to latency, al-lowing a single instruction to process entire arrays in the same time required for a single scalar operation. The next section, Section 3.2.2 details a proposed addressing scheme that supports these changes. 

3.2.2. Addressing Schema 

As previously mentioned, the proposed architecture adopts an addressing schema that is adapted from the RISC-V standard. The specific registers 18 used for the two inputs and one output of an instruction are identified by three 5-bit fields: rs1 , rs2 , and rd . Having only 5 bits, this limits the total number of registers to 25 = 32 , as more would not be addressable without more bits. This presents a challenge for trying to adapt RISC-V for IMC purposes, as a sensible crossbar array should have far more than 32 words of storage. To accommodate the proposed design’s large address space while pre-serving the RISC-V instruction formats, the design introduces the address bank , acting as an analog to the RISC-V register file. There are 32 elements in the address bank, each with 32 bits of capacity, exactly like RISC-V’s reg-ister file. An instruction can then target one of the elements of the address bank identically to a RISC-V instruction targeting an element of the register file, except instead of operating on the data in the address bank directly, the information in the address bank points to the location of the operands in the crossbar array. 

3.2.3. Proposed Address Format 

The crossbar array has 512 rows, requiring 9 bits to address, and 16 ad-dressable words per row, requiring 4 bits to address. Given the architectural constraint that the two inputs for a given instruction must lie on the same row, addressing two inputs (2 columns and 1 row) requires 17 bits. Since the proposed architecture adopts a two-operand convention where the output overwrites the second input, these 17 bits are sufficient to address the inputs and output for a scalar operation. One of the biggest promises of IMC, how-ever, is the vast vectorization potential, and the addressing scheme should reflect this. To provide native parallelism, each address specifies the number of rows an instruction should target beyond the base row. To clarify, if this “Num Rows” field is 0, the base row is still active. Additionally, should the “Num Rows” field contain a value larger than the amount of remaining rows, extra rows are simply ignored. Since the maximum number of rows that can be addressed is all 512 of them, this requires a further 9 bits, bringing the total number of bits for addressing to 26. This leaves 6 bits of the available 32 still unused. To make full use of the available bits, these remaining bits are used to specify a strided pattern, providing further flexibility. These bits, when interpreted as an unsigned binary number, give the interval between active rows. For instance, “000000” means every row in the selected range should be targeted, and “000010” means every fifth row should be targeted. It should be noted that this address format fits all the information re-quired to target the two operands in one single element of the address bank, meaning an instruction only needs one 5-bit field to target all inputs and 19 01101 R-Type Instruction funct7 rs2 rs1 funct3 rd opcode Address Bank x13 x12 x14 

> ���  ���
> 4bits

Input Addressing 4bits 9 bits 9 bits 6 bits Col A Col B Start Row Num Rows Stride x0 x31 Figure 9: Overview of the address bank and address format 

outputs. Since most instructions have an rs1 field, it is a logical choice to repurpose this field for addressing. In most cases, the rs2 field is simply ig-nored, though specific exceptions to this rule exist and are detailed in section 4. To summarize, Figure 9 depicts the function of the address bank along with the address format. 

4. Implementation 

This section presents a comprehensive mapping of the RV32I instruction set onto the proposed in-memory architecture. For each instruction, it pro-vides either a detailed IMPLY-based implementation or a clear rationale for its exclusion due to fundamental incompatibility with the architecture. To provide a high-level overview before detailing the specific algorithms, Table 1 lists the RV32I base instruction set, and classifies each instruction based on its functional category and the source of the underlying IMPLY algorithm. Additionally, this section details the implementation of instructions be-yond the standard base set. This includes common pseudo-instructions, which are implemented as native instructions to mitigate the inefficiencies of their standard definitions in a memristive environment, as well as the new custom instructions proposed in Section 3.2.1. 20 Table 1: Overview of the RV32I base set and implementation status 

Instruction Description Functional Type Implementation Source 

lb Load Byte Load/Store Excluded 

lh Load Half Excluded 

lw Load Word Excluded 

lbu Load Byte Unsigned Excluded 

lhu Load Half Unsigned Excluded 

sb Store Byte Excluded 

sh Store Half Excluded 

sw Store Word Excluded 

lui Load Upper Immediate Proposed 

xori XOR Immediate Boolean Basic Proposed 

ori OR Immediate Proposed 

andi AND Immediate Proposed 

xor XOR Proposed 

or OR Proposed 

and AND Proposed 

addi Add Immediate Arithmetic [16] 

slli Shift Left Logical Immediate Proposed & [7] 

srli Shift Right Logical Immediate Proposed & [7] 

srai Shift Right Arithmetic Immediate Proposed & [7] 

add Add [16] 

sub Subtract [17] 

sll Shift Left Logical Proposed & [7] 

srl Shift Right Logical Proposed & [7] 

sra Shift Right Arithmetic Proposed & [7] 

auipc Add Upper Immediate to PC [16] 

slti Set Less Than Immediate Comparative Proposed 

sltiu Set Less Than Immediate Unisgned Proposed 

slt Set Less Than Proposed 

sltu Set Less Than Unsigned Proposed 

beq Branch If Equal Control Flow Proposed 

bne Branch If Not Equal Proposed 

blt Branch If Less Than Proposed 

bge Branch If Greater or Equal Proposed 

bltu Branch If Less Than Unsigned Proposed 

bgeu Branch If Greater or Equal Unsigned Proposed 

jalr Jump and Link Register Proposed 

jal Jump and Link Proposed 

li Load Immediate Pseudo-Instructions Proposed 

mv Move Proposed 

21 4.1. Boolean Basics 

The detailed analysis begins with the fundamental Boolean logical op-erations. Since the IMPLY operation, combined with a logical ‘0’, forms a functionally complete logic system, establishing these basic logic gates is a prerequisite. These primitives serve as the building blocks upon which the more complex arithmetic and control flow algorithms presented in the following sections are constructed. In the RV32I instruction set, the native Boolean operations are limited to AND, OR, and XOR. Each of these in-structions takes two 32-bit operands as inputs and performs the specified logical operation in a bit-wise fashion. The instructions and , or , xor are all encoded as R-type instructions. This encoding has been modified to accommodate the proposed addressing scheme and is shown in Figure 10. The rs1 field is now used to target an entry in the address bank, and the rs2 and rd fields are ignored. The functions of the other fields are kept from the RISC-V standard. R-type funct7 rs2 address funct3 opcode            

> 31 ̀25 24 ̀20 19 ̀15 14 ̀12 11 ̀76̀0
> rd
> Figure 10: Modified R-type encoding

Since they all share an instruction format, the prerequisites for executing these instructions are uniform. The two source operands, denoted as A and B, occupy contiguous 32-bit blocks on the same row. Additionally, the execution of these algorithms requires one or more work memristors, which must also reside on the active row. In accordance with the architecture’s two-operand convention, the final result of the operations overwrite the B operand, while the data in operand A is preserved. 

4.1.1. Instruction: and 

The and instruction performs a bit-wise AND operation on the operands 

A and B. Using IMPLY logic, the AND operation can be expressed as 

ab = ( a → (b → 0)) → 0.The specific IMPLY algorithm used for this instruction is detailed in Ta-ble 2. This sequence computes the logical AND for two single-bit operands, 

a and b, utilizing one work memristor, w1. To extend this operation to n-bit operands, the algorithm is executed sequentially for each corresponding pair of input bits. This approach allows the single work memristor w1 to be reused for every iteration of the process, bringing the total number of required memristors to 2n + 1 . Since each bit is processed independently, 22 and one iteration takes 5 steps, it takes 5 n steps. For n = 32 , this process takes 65 memristors and 160 steps. 

> Table 2: Proposed AND algorithm

Steps Operation Equivalent Logic 1 F alse (w1) w11 = 0 

2 w21 = b0 → w11 w21 = b

3 w31 = a0 → w21 w31 = ab 

4 F alse (b) b4 = 0 

5 b5 = w31 → b4 b5 = ab 

4.1.2. Instruction: or 

The or instruction performs a bit-wise logical OR on the operands A and 

B. Using IMPLY logic, the OR operation can be expressed as a + b = ( a →

0) → b. At a high level, the or instruction is performed identically to the 

and instruction, using the algorithm in Table 3 for each pair of input bits. For n bit operands, this process takes 2n + 1 memristors and 3n steps. For 

n = 32 , this is 65 memristors and 96 steps. 

> Table 3: Proposed OR algorithm

Steps Operation Equivalent Logic 1 F alse (w1) w11 = 0 

2 w21 = a0 → w11 w21 = a

3 b3 = w21 → b0 b3 = a + b

4.1.3. Instruction: xor 

The xor instruction performs a bit-wise XOR operation on operands A

and B. Using IMPLY logic, the XOR operation can be expressed as a ⊕ b =(b → a) → (( a → b) → 0) . At a high level, this instruction is performed almost identically to the other two boolean basic instructions, except that it requires 2 additional work memristors, or 3 in total. It performs the algorithm in Table 4 for each corresponding pair of input bits. For n-bit operands, this instruction takes 2n + 3 memristors and 9n steps. For n = 32 ,this is 67 memristors and 288 steps. 

4.1.4. Boolean Immediate Instructions 

Complementing the register-based Boolean operations, the RV32I in-struction set includes immediate variants as well ( andi , ori , xori ). These 23 Table 4: Proposed XOR algorithm 

Steps Operation Equivalent Logic 1 F alse (w1, w 2, w 3) w11 = w12 = w13 = 0 

2 w21 = a0 → w11 w21 = a

3 w32 = b0 → w12 w32 = b

4 w43 = a0 → w13 w43 = a

5 w53 = w32 → w43 w53 = a → b

6 w62 = w21 → w32 w62 = a → b

7 F alse (b) b7 = 0 

8 b8 = w53 → b7 b8 = a → b

9 b9 = w62 → b8 b9 = a ⊕ b

instructions are functionally similar to their standard counterparts, with the distinction that the first operand is sourced directly from the instruction’s 12-bit immediate field rather than from a register. To support this in the proposed architecture, the standard I-type in-struction format is adapted as illustrated in Figure 11. Consistent with the general addressing scheme, the rs1 field is repurposed to index the address bank, while the rd field is unused and ignored. imm[11 ̀ 0] address funct3 opcode I-type          

> 31 ̀20 19 ̀15 14 ̀12 11 ̀76̀0
> rd
> Figure 11: Modified I-type encoding

In the proposed architecture, the execution of these immediate instruc-tions follows a two-stage process. First, the control logic reads the 12-bit immediate value from the instruction, sign-extends it to 32 bits, and writes this value directly into the crossbar array at the location designated for the first operand. This write operation is performed in two cycles: one cycle to assert the high-resistance state (logical ‘0’) for the relevant bits, and a second cycle to assert the low-resistance state (logical ‘1’) for the remaining bits. Once the immediate operand is present in the array, the execution proceeds identically to the corresponding standard version of the instruction. 

4.2. Arithmetic Instructions 

Building upon the Boolean primitives, this section introduces the funda-mental instructions for arithmetic computation. While Boolean operations provide the basis for logic, these instructions serve as the building blocks 24 for numerical computations, including multiplication and division. In the RV32I set, these capabilities are represented by addition ( add ), subtraction (sub ), and a suite of shift instructions ( sll , srl , sra ). As with the Boolean instructions, these arithmetic operations use the modified R-type encoding (see Figure 10). The prerequisites for the arithmetic instructions mirror those of the boolean basics. The two source operands, A and B, must be stored in contiguous 32-bit blocks within the same active row. In line with the ar-chitecture’s two-operand convention, the final arithmetic or shifted result is written back to the memory space originally occupied by operand B, while the integrity of operand A is maintained. 

4.2.1. Instruction: add 

The add instruction performs the addition of two 32-bit integers using a bit-serial full-adder approach. The operation is executed by processing two input bits and a carry-in bit to generate a corresponding sum and carry-out. The process initiates at the Least Significant Bit (LSB) with a carry-in of 0; the resulting carry-out is then propagated as the carry-in for the subsequent bit. In accordance with the RISC-V architecture, overflow detection for both signed and unsigned operations is not handled by the hardware, and responsibility for catching such exceptions is relegated to the programmer. This instruction uses the full-adder algorithm shown in Table 5 [16]. To perform the addition in the crossbar array, the two operands must lie in two of the addressable 32-bit chunks on the same row, designated as A and B.Additionally, four work memristors on the same row are required: w1, w2,and w3 for storing intermediate full-adder results, and another memristor c

for the carry bit. Thus in total, the algorithm requires 2n + 4 memristors, which equates to 68 memristors when n = 32 . During execution, the Sum 

output overwrites the b memristor, while the Cout overwrites the carry-in memristor c, allowing the same memristor to be used for the propagation of all carry bits. Upon completion, the A operand is preserved, while the final sum is stored on the memristors that previously held the B input. Given that the full-adder algorithm takes 20 steps, and it must be performed for each bit, the whole process takes 20 n steps, resulting in 640 steps for n = 32 .

4.2.2. Instruction: sub 

The sub instruction performs the subtraction of two 32-bit integers by using a full-subtractor. Similar to the addition process, the operation is ex-ecuted bit by bit, taking two input bits and a borrow-in bit to produce a difference and a borrow-out. The execution begins at the LSB with an initial 25 Table 5: Full adder algorithm proposed in [16] 

Steps Operation Equivalent Logic 1 F alse (w1, w 2, w 3) w11 = w12 = w13 = 0 

2 w21 = a → w11 w21 = a

3 w32 = b → w12 w32 = b

4 b4 = w21 → b0 b4 = a → b = X

5 w52 = a0 → w32 w52 = a → b = Y

6 F alse (w1) w61 = 0 

7 w71 = c0 → w21 w71 = c

8 c8 = w52 → c0 c8 = Y → c = Z

9 w93 = b4 → w13 w93 = X

10 w10 3 = w52 → w93 w10 3 = Y → X

11 w11 1 = w10 3 → w71 w11 1 = ( Y → X) → c

12 F alse (w3) w12 3 = 0 

13 w13 3 = c8 → w12 3 w13 3 = Z

14 w14 3 = b4 → w13 3 w14 3 = X → Z

15 c15 = b4 → c8 c15 = X → Z

16 F alse (b) b16 = 0 

17 b17 = w11 1 → b16 b17 = ( Y → X) → c

18 b18 = c15 → b17 b18 = ( X → Z) → (Y → X) → c = Sum 

19 F alse (c) c19 = 0 

20 c20 = w14 3 → c19 c20 = X → Z = Cout 

borrow-in of 0. The resulting borrow-out from each bit is then propagated as the borrow-in for the next bit. In alignment with the RISC-V ISA, the hard-ware does not provide overflow or underflow detection, leaving the handling of such errors to the programmer. The prerequisites for performing the subtraction within the crossbar ar-ray are identical to those of the add instruction. The two 32-bit operands must be located in contiguous blocks, A and B, on the same active row. To facilitate the computation, four work memristors are required: w1, w2, and 

w3 for intermediate state storage, and one of the borrow bit c. This results in a total count of 2n + 4 memristors, or 68 for a standard RV32I word length. The subtraction is executed according to the serial full-subtractor algo-rithm as detailed in Table 6 [17]. Throughout the execution, the calculated 

Dif f bit overwrites the value in the b memristor, while the Bout bit over-writes the previous borrow-in. The allows the borrow bit to be reused for each bit, similarly to the add instruction. Upon completion of the instruction, 26 the original minuend in operand A remains intact, while the final difference is stored where the B operand previously was. Identically to the addition, this instruction takes 20 n steps, or 640 steps for n = 32 .

> Table 6: Full subtractor algorithm proposed in [17]

Steps Operation Equivalent Logic 1 F alse (w1, w 2, w 3) w11 = w12 = w13 = 0 

2 w21 = a0 → w11 w21 = a

3 w32 = w21 → w12 w32 = a

4 w43 = w21 → w13 w43 = a

5 w53 = b0 → w43 w53 = b → a

6 b6 = w32 → b0 b6 = a → b

7 F alse (w1, w 2) w71 = w72 = 0 

8 w81 = b6 → w71 w81 = a → b

9 w91 = w53 → w81 w91 = a ⊕ b

10 w10 2 = w91 → w72 w10 2 = a ⊕ b

11 F alse (b) b11 = 0 

12 b12 = c0 → b11 b12 = c

13 w13 1 = c0 → w91 w13 1 = c → (a ⊕ b)

14 F alse (c) c14 = 0 

15 c15 = w13 1 → c14 c15 = c → (a ⊕ b)

16 c16 = w53 → c15 c16 = Bout 

17 w17 2 = b12 → w10 2 w17 2 = c → (a ⊕ b)

18 F alse (b) b18 = 0 

19 b19 = w17 2 → b18 b19 = c → (a ⊕ b)

20 b20 = w13 1 → b19 b20 = Dif f 

4.2.3. Shift Instructions 

Besides addition and subtraction, the other class of arithmetic instruc-tions that RISC-V defines are bit shift operations. These instructions take the contents of one of its source registers, and produce a copy that is shifted left or right by a number of bits equal to the value in the second source register. Since it is not sensible to shift a value by more than n − 1 bits, only the bottom log 2n bits of the second source register are considered. A naive approach that was first considered for shift operations in the serial IMPLY context starts by having the control logic read the second input and determining its unsigned value. This value will be called d for “shift distance”. Then the control logic can simply copy each memristor to 27 another memristor d positions away. The problem with this approach is that it is not based solely on data-flow, and its operation depends on the value d that the control logic has read. This eliminates the possibility of parallelization across rows, as the control logic would have to treat each row differently based on different values of d.Another approach proposed in [7] addresses these problems. It is based only on data flow by utilizing a crossbar array based 2:1 multiplexer and a logarithmic shift approach. It is important to note that their proposed shift routine inherently operates in-place, constituting a subtle deviation from the standard two-operand convention used thus far. Whereas previous instructions preserve operand A and overwrite operand B with the result, this algorithm concludes with the final shifted result having overwritten the 

A operand. Their proposed method, described by Algorithm 1, uses a right logical shift as an example. If dj = 1 , the first inner for loop is responsible for shifting a by 2j , and the second inner for loop fills the remaining bits with zeros. If dj = 0 , both for loops leave a unchanged [7]. 

Algorithm 1: Variable shift routine proposed in [7] 

Data: Input: n bit a, log 2n bit d, in a single row. Output: n bit 

a ≫ d, shifted in place 

Result: Shift operation implemented with 2:1 multiplexer and a logarithmic shift approach 

for j = 0 to log 2n − 1 do 

Compute a ← mux dj (a ≫ 2j , a ) as follows: 

for i = 0 to n − 2j − 1 do 

ai ← mux dj (ai+2 j , a i);

end for i = n − 2j to n − 1 do 

ai ← dj ai;

end end 

In order to realize this in the crossbar array, a suitable multiplexer algo-rithm is required. In order to shift in place, the output of the multiplexer algorithm should be stored on the memristor that holds its second input, or more specifically, the input chosen when s, the “select” input, is zero. The 

a and s inputs must be preserved, as they are used in a future iteration of the shift routine. The specified multiplexing operation follows the format 28 of a = mux s(b, a ). In boolean and IMPLY logic, a 2:1 multiplexer can be expressed as mux s(b, a ) = as + bs = ( b → (s → 0)) → (( a → s) → 0) .The proposed multiplexer algorithm detailed in Table 7 requires two work memristors, w1 and w2, on the same row as inputs a and b.

> Table 7: Proposed multiplexer algorithm for shift instructions

Steps Operation Equivalent Logic 1 F alse (w1, w 2) w11 = w12 = 0 

2 w21 = s0 → w01 w21 = s

3 w32 = w21 → w12 w32 = s

4 w41 = b0 → w21 w41 = bs 

5 w52 = a0 → w32 w52 = a → s

6 F alse (a) a6 = 0 

7 a7 = w52 → a6 a7 = a → s = as 

8 a8 = w41 → a7 a8 = bs → as = mux s(a, b )

Instruction: srl 

The srl instruction shifts an operand A by up to 31 positions to the right according to the bottom 5 bits of the B operand. Since it is a logical shift, the remaining bits that have not been shifted are assigned the value ‘0’. In the crossbar array, this is performed in exactly the manner described in Algorithm 1, using the proposed multiplexer algorithm. The second inner for-loop requires that ai receive the value dj ai. In IMPLY logic, this can be expressed as (ai → dj ) → 0. To do this, the algorithm shown in Table 8 is used. The same two work memristors used in the multiplexer algorithm can be used here, leaving the prerequisites unchanged. Upon completion of the algorithm, the dj input is preserved, and ai is either unchanged if no shift took place, or is zero if a shift occurred. 

> Table 8: Proposed auxiliary algorithm for shift instructions

Steps Operation Equivalent Logic 1 F alse (w1, w 2) w11 = w12 = 0 

2 w21 = a0 

> i

→ w11 w21 = ai

3 w32 = d0 

> j

→ w12 w32 = dj

4 w41 = w32 → w21 w41 = dj + ai

5 F alse (ai) a5 

> i

= 0 

6 a6 

> i

= w41 → a5 

> i

a6 

> i

= dj ai

To obtain the total memristor count, first the inputs are considered. The 29 primary input a, requires n memristors, and the shift distance d requires log 2n. Both the multiplexer algorithm and the auxiliary algorithm require two work memristors, but these can be the same two work memristors, bring-ing the memristor count to n + log 2n + 2 . Obtaining the step count is done by examining Algorithm 1. The outer loop runs log 2n times, and on each iteration, the multiplexer algorithm is performed n − 2j times, and the auxil-iary algorithm is performed 2j times. This can be expressed as the following sum: 

> log 2n−1

X

> j=0

(n − 2j )Nmux + 2 j Naux = ( nlog 2n)Nmux + ( n − 1)( Naux − Nmux ) (1) Substituting in the step counts, this results in 8nlog 2n − 2n + 2 steps, or 1218 when n = 32 .

Instruction: sll 

Algorithm 2: Proposed left logical shift routine 

Data: Input: n bit a, log 2n bit d, in a single row. Output: n bit 

a ≪ d, shifted in place 

Result: Left logical shift operation implemented with 2:1 multiplexer and a logarithmic shift approach 

for j = 0 to log 2n − 1 do 

Compute a ← mux dj (a ≪ 2j , a ) as follows: 

for i = n − 1 to 2j do 

ai ← mux dj (ai−2j , a i);

end for i = 2 j − 1 to 0 do 

ai ← dj ai;

end end 

Since a left logical shift is entirely symmetric to a right logical shift, the implementation of sll is essentially identical to srl , but mirrored. The same multiplexer and auxiliary algorithm are used. Algorithm 1 is adjusted, resulting in Algorithm 2. 

Instruction: sra 

A right arithmetic shift is slightly different than a right logical shift. Instead of writing zeros into the unshifted bits, the sign bit is copied instead. The implementation of sra is almost identical to srl , with one small change. Algorithm 1 becomes Algorithm 3. 30 Algorithm 3: Proposed right arithmetic shift routine 

Data: Input: n bit a, log 2n bit d, in a single row. Output: n bit 

a ≫ d, shifted in place 

Result: Shift operation implemented with 2:1 multiplexer and a logarithmic shift approach 

for j = 0 to log 2n − 1 do 

Compute a ← mux dj (a ≫ 2j , a ) as follows: 

for i = 0 to n − 2j − 1 do 

ai ← mux dj (ai+2 j , a i);

end for i = n − 2j to n − 2 do 

ai ← mux dj (an−1, a i);

end end 

The memristor count of this instruction is the same as the other shift instructions, but the step count is slightly different, since the auxiliary algo-rithm is replaced by more multiplexer algorithms. This simplifies the step count to 8nlog 2n steps, or 1280 when n = 32 .

4.2.4. Immediate Arithmetic Instructions 

The RV32I ISA provides immediate variants for each of the previously discussed arithmetic operations, with the exception of the sub instruction. These immediate instructions use the modified I-type encoding, as illustrated in Figure 11. Following the execution pattern of the Boolean immediate instructions, the process initiates by loading the sign-extended immediate value into the crossbar array, and once the immediate value is initialized within the array, the arithmetic operation proceeds identically to its normal R-type counterpart. The initialization phase introduces a constant overhead of two steps: one to set the memristors representing logic ’1’s and a second to set those representing logic ’0’s. For the addi instruction, the immediate value is written to the memris-tors holding the first operand, whereas for the shift immediate instructions, the immediate value gets written to the second operand memristors. The reason for the deviation from convention here is that the shift instructions shift the first operand in place, rather than overwriting the second operand, like most instructions do. For this reason, it would not make sense to use the first operand for the immediate value. 31 In addition to these standard immediate operations, the RV32I set in-cludes the auipc (Add Upper Immediate to PC) instruction. In the standard RISC-V specification, this instruction constructs a 32-bit offset (consisting of a 20-bit upper immediate and 12 lower zeros), adds it to the current value of the Program Counter, and stores the result in a destination regis-ter. In the proposed crossbar architecture, auipc functions similarly to the 

addi instruction, but utilizes the modified U-type encoding (See Figure 12) due to its larger immediate value. The difference lies in the data initializa-tion phase. While the constructed immediate value is pasted into the first operand memristors, the control logic simultaneously pastes the current PC value into the second operand memristors. Because these writes target dis-tinct columns, they occur in parallel and do not incur any additional steps beyond the standard two-step initialization. Once both the PC and the im-mediate value are present in the active row, the operation proceeds using the standard addition algorithm. imm[31 ̀ 12] U-type address opcode      

> 31 ̀12 11 ̀76̀0
> Figure 12: Modified U-type encoding

4.3. Load Store Instructions 

In conventional von Neumann architectures, load and store instructions are required for giving the CPU access to the data held within the memory. Since the CPU cannot operate directly on data residing in main memory, values must be explicitly moved into a limited set of registers. However, in the proposed in-memory architecture, storage and computation are unified within the crossbar array. As all relevant data is resident in the array and di-rectly addressable by the processing logic, explicit data transfer instructions become redundant. Thus, the standard RISC-V load and store instructions (lb , lh , lw , lbu , lhu , sb , sh , and sw ) are not implemented. The only class of load operations required for the proposed architecture are “load immediate” instructions, where the data originates from the in-struction word itself rather than the memory array. The RV32I standard defines lui to load a 20-bit value into the upper bits of a target register. Ideally, a single instruction would load a full 32-bit immediate; however, the instruction encoding space is insufficient to contain both a 32-bit value and the necessary opcode bits. Therefore, RISC-V typically utilizes the pseu-doinstruction li to handle 12-bit values or lower-bit insertion. In RISC-V, 32 li is essentially an alias for addi , which adds a signed immediate to a zeroed register, and stores the result in the destination register. In the proposed architecture, both lui and li are implemented as dis-tinct, native instructions rather than relying on arithmetic pseudoinstruc-tions. This design choice avoids the energy and latency overhead associated with invoking an addition for simple data initialization. 

• lui : Implemented using the modified U-type encoding (Figure 12), this instruction targets the upper 20 bits of the destination block. 

• li : Implemented using the modified I-type encoding (Figure 11), this instruction targets the lower 12 bits. In the crossbar array, both instructions are executed by applying V SET 

and V RESET signals to the desired bits. To do this, only one of the two columns in the addressing configuration is considered. To remain consistent with other immediate instructions, the “Column A” field is used, and the “Column B” field is ignored. The control logic extracts the immediate value from the instruction and performs the write in two steps: first, V RESET is applied to all the memristors that should hold a value of ‘0’; second, the specific bits corresponding to ‘1’s in the immediate value are set by applying VSET . This approach ensures that immediate loading is significantly faster and more energy-efficient than the equivalent arithmetic derivation used in standard RISC-V cores. 

5. Comparative Instructions 

To evaluate the relative size of two values, the RV32I instruction set includes a set of comparative operations. These instructions compare two source operands and write the resulting Boolean value to a destination reg-ister. Accordingly, standard RISC-V encodes these operations using the R-type format. The proposed architecture adapts this encoding into the modified R-type format shown in Figure 10. Consistent with the system’s two-operand policy, the boolean result of the comparison is written directly over the second source operand, replacing the original data. 

5.1. Instruction: sltu 

In RISC-V, the sltu instruction compares two 32-bit unsigned integers. It sets the destination register to 1 if the first operand is strictly less than the second, and to 0 otherwise. To achieve this in the crossbar array, first a 33 suitable single-bit comparator algorithm is needed. This algorithm takes in two input memristors and produces two distinct outputs: a “Less Than” bit (L), which indicates if the first bit is strictly smaller than the second, and an “Equal” bit ( E), which indicates if the two bits are identical. In IMPLY logic, a “Less Than” comparison is expressed as b → a, and an equality check is simply a NXOR. The comparator algorithm is shown in Table 9, and requires two input memristors, a and b, and three work memristors, all on the same row. 

> Table 9: Proposed single-bit comparator

Steps Operation Equivalent Logic 1 F alse (w1, w 2, w 3) w11 = w12 = w13 = 0 

2 w21 = a0 → w11 w21 = a

3 w32 = b0 → w12 w32 = b

4 w43 = b0 → w13 w43 = b

5 w52 = w21 → w32 w52 = b → a

6 w61 = w43 → w21 w61 = a → b

7 F alse (w3) w73 = 0 

8 w83 = w61 → w73 w83 = a → b

9 w93 = w52 → w83 w93 = a ⊕ b

10 F alse (w1) w10 1 = 0 

11 w11 1 = w93 → w10 1 w11 1 = a ⊕ b = E

12 F alse (b) b12 = 0 

13 b13 = w52 → b12 b13 = b → a = L

In order to extend this to n bit comparisons, additional logic is necessary. A simple approach is to first produce the E and L outputs for each bit. These will be called Ei and Li. Then, the comparison starts at the Most Significant Bit (MSB), or at index n − 1. If Ln−1 is set, it is already clear that the first input is less than the second. If En−1 is set, then the next most significant bit is the most relevant, and the process repeats. Formally, the logic that this process describes is: 

> n−1

X

> i=0

Li(

> n−1

Y

> j=i+1

Ej ) (2) For clarity, each summand in the case where n = 4 is listed. 

• i = 3 : L3

34 • i = 2 : E3L2

• i = 1 : E3E2L1

• i = 0 : E3E2E1L0

After all summands are combined with an OR operation, the comparison is complete. This approach works, but suffers from high memristor usage. Along with the inputs, at least n work memristors are required to hold the Ei outputs. This can be reduced to only four work memristors simply by changing the order in which operations are performed. This process is described by Algorithm 4. 

Algorithm 4: Proposed less-than comparison routine 

Data: Input: n bit a, n bit b, in a single row. Output: 1 bit comparison output 1) Produce En−1 and Ln−1, stored on a work memristor and the 

bn−1 memristor, respectively; 2) for i = n − 2 to 0 do 

Produce Ei and Li, stored on a work memristor and the bi

memristor, respectively; Create current summand: L′ 

> i

← Ei+1 Li;Accumulate summands: L′′  

> i

← Li+1 + L′

> i

;Accumulate equality product: E′ 

> i

← Ei+1 Ei;

The memristors holding Li+1 and Ei+1 are now free to be overwritten ;

end 

3) Reset memristors (Ln−1 : L1);After this algorithm is done, the final result is stored on the memristor corresponding to the least significant bit of the second operand ( b0, now designated as L0), while the entire first operand ( a) is preserved. The total required memristor count for this instruction is 2n + 4 : 2n for the inputs, 3 work memristors for the comparator, and 1 to hold the accumulating equality product. The latency of the instruction is derived from the sequence detailed in Algorithm 4. Step 1 consists of one comparator algorithm, adding 13 steps. Then, in step 2, a for loop runs for n − 1 iterations. Each iteration requires a comparator, two AND operations, and an OR operation, bringing the step 35 count per iteration to 26. Finally, step 3 requires one cycle to complete. This is 26 n − 12 steps in total. 

5.2. Instruction: slt 

The implementation of slt introduces additional complexity compared to sltu . Since signed integers are represented in 2s complement form, the sign bit must be considered. If the sign bit in a is the same as in b, the process for the remaining bits is identical to sltu . Otherwise, the sign bit is the only relevant bit. The logic that describes this process is as follows. 

slt a, b = En−1 Ln−1 + En−1(sltu a[n − 2 : 0] , b [n − 2 : 0]) (3) This form has some issues, namely that both En−1 and En−1 are required, so an equivalent form is better suited. First, one can recognize that p q 

is equivalent to p + q. This allows the first summand to be expressed as 

En−1 + Ln−1. Then, another simplification can be made by recognizing that 

p + q is identical to p → q. Using this, the whole expressions becomes 

slt a, b = ( En−1 + Ln−1) → En−1(sltu a[n − 2 : 0] , b [n − 2 : 0]) (4) The final output is again stored on the L0 memristor. The amount of memristors used is 2n + 4 . 2n are needed to hold the two inputs, and evaluating sltu for everything but the MSB requires four work memristors. The remaining logic requires less than four work memristors, making the sltu portion the limiting factor. To find the step count, first the sltu portion is considered, which takes 26 n − 12 steps. Since it acts on everything but the MSB, n can be replaced with n − 1, resulting in 26 n − 38 

steps. Then, the comparator is run on the MSB, adding 13 more steps. The remaining logic consists of an OR operation, an AND operation, and an IMPLY operation, adding 3, 5, and 1 steps, respectively. All added together, this takes 26 n − 16 steps. 

6. Control Flow Instructions 

In order to facilitate non-sequential code execution, the RV32I instruction set provides some control flow instructions. Deviating from sequential exe-cution is essential for implementing constructs such as loops, function calls, and conditional statements. These instructions are broadly categorized into two types: unconditional jumps (J-type), and conditional branches (B-type). 36 6.1. Jumps 

In RISC-V, unconditional control flow instructions, referred to as jumps, simply write a specified value to the PC, and store a return address (PC + 4 )to a target register. There are two such instructions in the RV32I base set: 

jal and jalr , which are used to implement function calls and returns. 

6.1.1. Instruction: jal 

In the proposed instruction set, the jal instruction is encoded using the modified J-type format, as shown in Figure 13. This format repurposes the standard J-type encoding, dedicating bits 30:12 to a 20-bit immediate value (imm [20 : 1] ) that acts as a signed offset to add to the PC. The execution of the jump involves appending a ‘0’ to the least significant bit, sign-extending this value, and adding the result to the PC. In short, this is expressed as the following operation: PC = PC + SignExt ({imm [20 : 1] , ‘0’}) (5) Then, the value PC + 4 is stored to the crossbar array at the location pointed to by the address field. For this, the control logic considers only the “Start Row” and “Column A” parameters from the referenced address bank entry, ignoring the remaining fields. imm[20,10 ̀ 1,11,19 ̀ 12] J-type address opcode      

> 31 ̀12 11 ̀76̀0
> Figure 13: Modified J-type encoding

6.1.2. Instruction: jalr 

In RISC-V, the jalr instruction functions very similarly to the jal in-struction, but instead of using a large immediate value as a PC-relative offset, it uses a register-based value. This enables the program to jump to an address calculated at runtime, which is often used for returning from a function or invoking a function pointer. The target address is obtained by adding a sign-extended 12-bit immediate to the value in a source register: PC = rs1 + SignExt (imm ) (6) In the proposed architecture, the jalr instruction functions the same way but sources its base address from the crossbar array rather than a register file. To support this, it uses the modified I-type format illustrated in Figure 11. 37 The address field indexes the address bank to locate the base address value in the crossbar array. Unlike the previously mentioned instructions that use the modified I-type format, where the rd field is ignored, here it remains active. It specifies the address bank slot that points to the location in the crossbar array where the return address should be stored. Since both the source and destination are only single words, the control logic only considers the “Start Row” and “Column A” parameters of the respective addressing configurations. The execution sequence of the jalr instruction is as follows: 1. Read Base Address: The control logic reads the base address from the crossbar array at the location specified by the address field. 2. Store Return Address: The control logic computes the value PC +4 

and writes it to the crossbar array at the location specified by the rd 

field. The write operation uses the established two-phase SET/RESET process. 3. Update PC: Lastly, the control logic sign-extends the 12-bit imme-diate, adds it to the base address read in step 1, and writes the result to the PC, completing the jump. 

6.2. Branches 

Conditional branch instructions are used to steer the control flow of a program dynamically, based on data values. These instructions compare two operands, and if a certain condition is met, update the PC by adding a signed offset, which is used to implement loops and if-else structures. The RV32I instruction set defines six branch instructions: beq , bne , blt , bge ,

bltu , and bgeu .In the proposed instruction set, these instructions are all encoded with the modified B-type format as shown in Figure 14. This format reflects the standard RISC-V B-type encoding but repurposes the source operand fields. Instead of indexing registers with rs1 and rs2 , these instructions use 

address1 and address2 fields, which index the address bank to locate the source operands within the crossbar array. Since branch comparisons operate only on scalar values, the control logic considers only the “Start Row” and “Column A” parameters from the referenced address bank entries. As opposed to the other comparative instructions, which perform the operation in the crossbar array, branch comparisons are executed within the control logic itself using traditional CMOS circuitry. To do this, the control logic first reads the two source operands using sense amplifiers, and 38 address1 funct3 imm[12,10 ̀ 5] imm[4 ̀ 1,11] opcode B-type            

> 31 ̀25 24 ̀20 19 ̀15 14 ̀12 11 ̀76̀0
> address2 Figure 14: Modified B-type encoding

then evaluates the branch condition with a standard CMOS comparator. This is done primarily because performing 64 read operations (32 for each operand) and a CMOS comparison uses significantly less energy than all of the IMPLY operations involved in an in-memory comparison, making the proposed architecture better suited for edge computing. According to Kvatinsky et al. [18], reading values from the crossbar array involves pulsing the desired memristor with a voltage V READ , and using a sense amplifier to measure the current which in turn reveals the state of the memristor. Since this operation should be non-destructive, V READ must be significantly smaller than the voltage V SET , which is used in an IMPLY operation. As a consequence, the read operation draws less current, and therefore less energy than an IMPLY step. A second advantage of this approach is that performing the comparison in-memory is needlessly destructive to the second operand. The result of the comparison is not relevant beyond the time of the branch, so there is no reason to overwrite the second operand if it can be avoided, potentially saving costly copy operations. If the control logic determines that the branch condition is met, and the branch should be taken, it updates the PC to the branch target address by adding the sign-extended immediate offset to the current PC: PC = PC + SignExt ({imm [12 : 1] , ‘0’}) (7) If the condition instead evaluates to false, the control logic takes no action, and the PC is incremented as normal (PC = PC + 4 ). 

6.3. Architecture-Specific Instructions 

While the RV32I instruction set provides a comprehensive foundation for load-store architectures, it lacks the mechanisms required to manage the hardware of the proposed in-memory architecture. Specifically, RISC-V in-structions have no concept of an address bank or the need to load addressing configurations for a large crossbar array. Furthermore, as an architecture designed for edge applications, the system requires a dedicated interface to ingest data from external sensors. To accommodate these differences, the 39 proposed instruction set includes a small set of custom instructions not found in the RV32I standard. 

6.3.1. Instruction: la (Load Address) 

The la instruction provides the mechanism for dynamic addressing in the proposed architecture. It reads a 32-bit data word from the crossbar array and loads it into a specific slot of the address bank. This capability is required for programs that calculate addresses at runtime and iterate through different memory locations. To support this operation, the la instruction uses the modified I-type encoding shown in Figure 15. Consistent with the addressing schema, the 

rs1 field indexes the address bank to determine the source location in the crossbar array. Since the operation loads only a single word, only the “Start Row” and “Column A” fields of the referenced address are considered; the “Num Rows”, “Column B”, and “Stride” fields are ignored. Unlike other in-structions that use the modified I-type encoding where the rd field is ignored, it is active here. It holds a direct index (0 – 31), specifying which slot in the address bank will receive the loaded value. It should be noted that while the I-type format is selected because it conveniently provides both rs1 and 

rd fields, the 12-bit imm field is entirely unused and ignored by the control logic during this operation. imm[11 ̀ 0] address funct3 opcode I-type          

> 31 ̀20 19 ̀15 14 ̀12 11 ̀76̀0
> AB Slot
> Figure 15: Modified I-type encoding for address bank instructions

The execution sequence of the la instruction proceeds in two phases: 1. Read Phase: The control logic uses sense amplifiers to read the mem-ristors where the 32 -bit source word is held. 2. Write Phase: The control logic then writes this value into the address bank slot specified by rd . Since the address bank is physically imple-mented as a memristive crossbar array, this write operation follows the same procedure as the li instruction. In the first cycle, voltage pulses are applied to SET all bits corresponding to a logical ‘1’. In the second cycle, pulses are applied to RESET all bits corresponding to a logical ‘0’. 40 6.3.2. Instruction: lai (Load Address Immediate) 

The lai instruction acts as the mechanism for static addressing in the proposed architecture. It allows the program to load a fixed 12-bit value directly into the lower bits of a specified slot of the address bank. Static addressing is a required feature, as it provides the control logic with the initial valid addressing configurations required to target data in the crossbar array before any dynamic addresses can be calculated. This instruction uses the modified I-type encoding illustrated in Figure 15. In this format, the rd field specifies the destination slot (0–31) within the address bank. The 12-bit imm field contains the data to be loaded. Unlike standard arithmetic immediate instructions, the lai instruction does not 

sign-extend the immediate value. Since the address bank holds structural configuration data rather than signed numerical values, sign extension is not necessary. Preserving the integrity of the upper 20 bits when modifying the lower 12 bits is more important. Additionally, the rs1 field is unused and ignored, as the instruction relies solely on the immediate field for its source data. The execution follows a direct write sequence managed by the control logic. Identical to the write phase of the la instruction, the operation is performed in two cycles. First, the control logic applies SET voltages to write logical ‘1’s to the relevant bits of the target slot. In the subsequent cycle, RESET voltages are applied to write logical ‘0’s. 

6.3.3. Instruction: laui (Load Address Upper Immediate) 

The laui instruction serves as the complement to lai , completing the mechanism for static addressing. While lai writes to the lower 12 bits of an addressing configuration, laui loads a fixed 20-bit value into the upper bits of a specified address bank slot. This instruction uses the modified U-type encoding as shown in Figure 16. Identically to the lai instruction, the rd field contains a direct index indicating the target slot in the address bank. The 20-bit imm field contains the data to be loaded. imm[31 ̀ 12] U-type AB Slot opcode        

> 31 ̀12 11 ̀76̀0
> Figure 16: Modified U-type encoding for laui instruction

The execution of the write operation follows the established two-phase write sequence, writing the ‘1’s and the ‘0’s in two separate steps. Similarly 41 to the lai instruction, the write operation is strictly confined to the upper 20 bits, leaving the lower 12 bits undisturbed. 

6.3.4. Instruction: lio (Load from IO Register) 

In order to ingest data from external sources, the proposed instruction set includes the lio instruction. The control logic contains the IO Register, a 32-bit register that peripherals can populate, and the lio instruction moves the data from this register to a target location in the crossbar array. This instruction uses the modified R-type encoding as shown in Figure 10. The rs1 field points to the address configuration the control logic should use as the target location. Since lio has only one operand, the “Column B” field of this addressing configuration is ignored, storing the value to “Column A”. The “Num Rows” and “Stride” are not ignored to allow the value to be pasted to multiple rows. 

6.3.5. Instruction: sio (Store to IO Register) 

In order to allow data in the crossbar array to be read out externally, the instruction sio is proposed. It is essentially the opposite of lio , moving a 32-bit value from a target location in the crossbar array to the IO Register. Similarly to the lio instruction, it uses the modified R-type encoding as shown in Figure 10, and it ignores the “Column B” field, as it has only one operand. However unlike the lio instruction, the “Num Rows” and “Stride” fields are ignored since only one value can be held in the IO Register. 

6.3.6. Instruction: mv 

In the standard RV32I instruction set, mv allows the value from one reg-ister to be copied to another. It is implemented as a pseudo-instruction that invokes an addition ( addi rd, rs1, 0 ). While efficient in traditional CMOS logic, invoking an addition for simple data movement is extremely inefficient in a memristive crossbar. Thus, the proposed architecture im-plements mv as a native instruction using a modified I-type encoding (see Figure 11). Unlike the register-to-register transfer in standard RISC-V, the proposed implementation performs a column-to-column copy within the ac-tive rows. This instruction is necessary to preserve data that would otherwise be overwritten by another operation. The execution of the mv instruction uses the algorithm shown in Table 10 to copy individual bits. To move an n-bit word, the algorithm is applied bit-wise, reusing the work memristor each time. The total number of steps and memristors required is 3n and 2n + 1 , respectively. 42 Table 10: IMPLY copy algorithm 

Steps Operation Equivalent Logic 1 F alse (w1, b ) w11 = b1 = 0 

2 w21 = a0 → w11 w21 = a

3 b3 = w21 → b1 b3 = a

6.4. System Instructions 

The RISC-V standard defines several system-level instructions necessary for managing program execution, power states, and trap handling. Examples include wfi (Wait for Interrupt), ebreak (Environment Break), and mret 

(Machine Return). Unlike the data-processing and memory-access instructions discussed pre-viously, these system instructions do not interact with the crossbar array, nor do they rely on serial IMPLY computation. Instead, they interface exclu-sively with the control logic and its internal components (such as the Control and Status Registers). Because these instructions do not entail any memris-tive state changes in the crossbar array or address bank, their exact hardware implementation is considered beyond the scope of this work. For the pur-poses of this design and the associated case study, these system instructions are treated as abstracted functional blocks within the control logic and are assumed to operate exactly as defined by the RISC-V specification. 

7. Results and Discussion 

Having defined the behavior of the proposed design’s instruction set in section 4, this section now examines the practical capabilities of the design. First, the circuit level metrics of each instruction are described, then a case study is provided showcasing how the design could be used, and finally a critical discussion of the design choices made during the development of the architecture. 

7.1. Circuit-level Simulation 7.1.1. Simulation Set-up 

To quantify the energy consumption and verify the functional correctness of each proposed instruction, the ATOMIC [8] simulator was used, which uses PyLTSpice [19] to simulate memristive algorithms at the circuit-level. The memristor model used is the VTEAM model [20, 21]. The VTEAM model 43 Table 11: Fitted VTEAM parameters used for simulation 

Parameter vof f von αof f αon Rof f Ron 

Value 0.7V -10mV 3 3 1 M Ω 10 k Ω

kon kof f wof f won wC aof f aon 

-0.5 nm/s 1cm/s 0 nm 3 nm 107 pm 3 nm 0 nm 

> Table 12: IMPLY parameters used for simulation with ATOMIC

VSET VCON D VRESET tpulse RG

1V 0.9V −1V 30 ns 40 kΩ

and ATOMIC were configured with the following parameters in Table 11 and 12. It is important to note that the VTEAM model characterizes the be-havior of a memristor whose parameters are fitted to experimental data derived from the Knowm memristor–an early, discrete memristor featuring large technology nodes [21, 22]. Since these early discrete devices have much larger physical dimensions than integrated devices in a crossbar array, they require substantially higher drive currents to induce state changes. As such, the resulting energy metrics should be interpreted as conservative approxi-mations. Still, they provide a reliable way of evaluating the relative costs and scaling behavior of the different instructions. 

7.1.2. Circuit-level Metrics 

As shown in Table 13, for each instruction in the proposed instruction set, the following metrics were deduced: 

• Latency: Defined as the total number of IMPLY steps required to per-form an instruction. This metric accounts for all operations performed within both the crossbar array and the address bank. Any clock cycles that may be needed by the control logic are not considered. 

• Area: The spatial footprint of an instruction, determined by the total number of memristors required on an active row. This includes the memristors holding the input and output operands, as well as any required work memristors. 

• Energy Consumption: Evaluated in nanojoules ( nJ ) using ATOMIC simulations. Because the switching energy of a memristor is asymmet-rical (i.e., transitioning a memristor from an “on” state to an “off” state 44 consumes a different amount of energy than the reverse), the reported values represent the average energy consumed across all possible input combinations. 

• Sense Amplifier Reads (SARs): The total number of read opera-tions required for an instruction. This quantifies how many times the control logic must read values from the crossbar array using the sense amplifiers. Despite the proposed architecture being an exclusively 32-bit system, adhering to the RV32I standard, the circuit-level metrics in Table 13 are given as functions of an arbitrary bit-width of n. This generalized rep-resentation provides insight into the scaling behavior of bit-serial IMPLY computation. For example, it illustrates how the boolean basic and additive instructions scale with O(n) complexity, whereas the more complex shift operations scale with O(nlog n) complexity. Additionally, the general n-bit formulation demonstrates the flexibility of the IMPLY algorithms that un-derlie each instruction, providing a clear expectation should future designs adapt the system for more lightweight 16-bit or higher-precision 64-bit work-loads. 

7.1.3. Discussion 

As seen in Table 13, there is a wide range in the energy and latency costs across the proposed instruction set. Arithmetic and comparative instruc-tions are significantly more energy-intensive and require considerably more IMPLY steps to execute than the boolean basic instructions. Aside from the mv instruction, all other instructions involve only direct reads from or writes to either the crossbar array or address bank. These operations are comparatively inexpensive, as any required logic (such as evaluating branch conditions) is efficiently offloaded to the CMOS-based control logic. Since the energy consumption of the mv instruction is on the order of the boolean basic instructions, and it does not contribute to the processing of information, it should be avoided whenever possible. To maximize energy efficiency, code written for the proposed architecture should conform to the design’s two-operand, destructive-write convention. In the case of immedi-ate instructions, the instruction set provides some flexibility to avoid data movement. The immediate arithmetic and boolean instructions load the im-mediate value to “Column B” and subsequently overwrite it with the result. If the immediate value should persist, lui and li can be used to load an im-mediate value into the safe “Column A”, and then the non-immediate variant of the desired operation can be used, overwriting the other operand. While 45 Table 13: Circuit-level metrics for all proposed instructions (with bit-width n)

Instruction Steps Memristors Avg Energy (nJ) SARs 

li 2 0.375 n 0.0875 n −

lui 2 0.625 n 0.1459 n −

xori 9n + 2 2n + 3 2.0708 n −

ori 3n + 2 2n + 1 1.0058 n −

andi 5n + 2 2n + 1 1.1634 n −

xor 9n 2n + 3 1.8374 n −

or 3n 2n + 1 0.7724 n −

and 5n 2n + 1 0.9300 n −

addi 20 n + 2 2n + 4 5.0590 n −

slli 8nlog 2n − 2n + 4 n + log 2n + 2 1.6248 nlog 2n + 0 .2334 log 2n − 0.5006 n + 0 .5006 −

srli 8nlog 2n − 2n + 4 n + log 2n + 2 1.6248 nlog 2n + 0 .2334 log 2n − 0.5006 n + 0 .5006 −

srai 8nlog 2n + 2 n + log 2n + 2 1.6248 nlog 2n + 0 .2334 log 2n −

add 20 n 2n + 4 4.8256 n −

sub 20 n 2n + 4 3.8525 n −

sll 8nlog 2n − 2n + 2 n + log 2n + 2 1.6248 nlog 2n − 0.5006 n + 0 .5006 −

srl 8nlog 2n − 2n + 2 n + log 2n + 2 1.6248 nlog 2n − 0.5006 n + 0 .5006 −

sra 8nlog 2n n + log 2n + 2 1.6248 nlog 2n −

auipc 20 n + 2 2n + 4 5.2924 n −

slti 26 n − 19 2n + 4 5.0361 n − 3.1025 −

sltiu 26 n − 15 2n + 4 5.0361 n − 2.6324 −

slt 26 n − 16 2n + 4 4.8027 n − 3.1025 −

sltu 26 n − 12 2n + 4 4.8027 n − 2.6324 −

beq − 2n − 2n

bne − 2n − 2n

blt − 2n − 2n

bge − 2n − 2n

bltu − 2n − 2n

bgeu − 2n − 2n

jalr 2 2n 0.2334 n n

jal 2 n 0.2334 n −

la 2 n 0.2334 n n

lai 2 0.375 n 0.0875 n −

laui 2 0.625 n 0.1459 n −

lio 2 n 0.2334 n −

sio − n − n

mv 3n 2n + 1 0.5811 n −

this requires extra instructions, it provides some flexibility for a potential compiler. Along with being the most energy-intensive operations, the arithmetic and comparative operations also incur the most latency. For example, a single add instruction takes 640 IMPLY cycles for standard 32-bit operands. While this bit-serial execution is dramatically slower than the single-cycle addition in traditional CMOS logic, the native parallelism of the proposed architecture redeems this limitation. Since the control logic can drive column lines across an arbitrary number of active rows simultaneously, performing an operation on an arbitrary m rows introduces zero latency penalty over a 46 single scalar operation. In effect, the “latency per operation” reduces by a factor of m. Despite the inherent slowness of serial stateful logic, the huge vectorization allows the design to remain competitive for data-parallel tasks. Additionally, the metrics in Table 13 further justify the decision to evalu-ate branch conditions inside the traditional CMOS-based control logic rather than in the crossbar array. Performing comparisons in the crossbar array is expensive; the sltu instruction, for instance, consumes around 160 nJ of en-ergy for a 32-bit evaluation. In contrast, the bltu instruction costs only the minimal energy needed to read the operands via sense amplifiers, followed by a highly energy-efficient evaluation in a standard CMOS comparator. By of-floading branch conditions to the control logic, the architecture saves energy and avoids a great deal of latency. Finally, an analysis of the spatial footprint of all instructions reveals a potential optimization in the architecture. The proposed design includes 8 work memristors per row, but as can be seen in Table 13, the maximum needed work memristors at any given time is 4. This redundancy is not necessary, and the design could be modified to only have 4 work memris-tors without issue. However, if in the future, the instruction set should be expanded with more complex operations, like in-memory multiplication and division, it is possible that the need for more work memristors returns. For this reason, this design parameter should be seen as flexible. 

7.2. Case Study 

While the circuit-level metrics provide a low-level understanding of the proposed design’s capabilities and resource consumption, a complete real-world application is necessary to truly evaluate the design’s strengths. Edge computing devices, such as environmental sensor nodes, typically exhibit a very specific operational pattern: they sporadically collect data, perform some light local preprocessing, and spend the vast majority of their lifes-pan in an idle state. This profile perfectly aligns with the strengths of the proposed architecture. Since memristors are a non-volatile storage medium, the design’s idle state incurs near-zero static energy loss. When active, the reduced data movement and parallelism capabilities allow it to efficiently process the accumulated data directly within the memory array. To demonstrate the viability of the proposed ISA and architecture’s ad-dressing schema, a case study involving an intelligent temperature sensor was devised. The node is designed to measure the ambient temperature throughout the day, split into four periods (e.g., night, morning, afternoon, evening). During each period, the sensor takes eight temperature measure-ments, or one every 45 minutes, and it switches to a new row when a period 47 is over. Rather than simply storing or transmitting this data, the node per-forms preprocessing of the data locally at the end of each day. Specifically, for each of the four periods, it calculates the average temperature and counts the number of samples that exceed a predefined period-specific threshold. To reduce the amount of instructions the design must run, this end-of-day pro-cessing is performed for all four periods in parallel, thereby reducing energy consumption. To accomplish this, the system must be augmented with a peripheral temperature sensor and a hardware timer configured to trigger at 45-minute intervals. Using the timer, the program execution is entirely interrupt-driven. Between measurements, the architecture rests in a dormant state by invoking a Wait-for-Interrupt ( wfi ) instruction. Each time the timer expires, the sensor takes a measurement and sends an interrupt to the control logic. The design then wakes up, and executes the interrupt handler, which ingests the sample via the lio instruction, places it into the crossbar array, and updates the pointer to where the next sample should be stored. Only if it is the last sample of the day, the handler executes the parallel averaging and super-threshold counting before returning to the idle state. Because the node should operate continuously, the software is designed for indefinite scaling. Once the crossbar array reaches its maximum row capacity, the control logic increments its internal array ID, continuing execution on a fresh memory bank. 

7.2.1. Common Computational Patterns of the Proposed ISA 

Writing code for a destructive, two-operand architecture without tra-ditional memory requires a new approach to assembly programming. This section explores some of the common computational patterns that arise from the capabilities and restrictions of the ISA. Only snippets of the code are shown here in order to highlight specific examples of how the proposed ad-dressing schema interacts with the proposed ISA in ways that depart from a traditional understanding of assembly code. 

Static Addressing with Immediates: Static addressing occurs when the location of an operand is known at compile time. While conceptually not dissimilar to static addressing in a load-store architecture, the proposed ISA has a different format for addresses. Rather than referencing a position in a linear memory space, addresses are comprised of two indices that point to a row and column in a two-dimensional space. Furthermore, the parallelism native to the proposed ISA allow for a single instruction to target more than just one row. The code in Listing 1 elucidates these concepts. 48 Listing 1: Static addressing                                      

> 124 #load threshold values to column 11 (assuming const. for each period of the year)
> 125 laui ab31 10110000000000100111
> 126 lai ab31 111100000011 #ab31 = [11,0,4,508,3]
> 127 lui ab31 threshold_0[31:12]
> 128 li ab31 threshold_0[11:0] #every fourth row, start with row4 = threshold_0
> 129 130 laui ab31 10110000000000101111
> 131 lai ab31 111100000011 #ab31 = [11,0,5,508,3]
> 132 lui ab31 threshold_1[31:12]
> 133 li ab31 threshold_1[11:0] #every fourth row, start with row5 = threshold_1
> 134 135 laui ab31 10110000000000110111
> 136 lai ab31 111100000011 #ab31 = [11,0,6,508,3]
> 137 lui ab31 threshold_2[31:12]
> 138 li ab31 threshold_2[11:0] #every fourth row, start with row6 = threshold_2
> 139 140 laui ab31 10110000000000111111
> 141 lai ab31 111100000011 #ab31 = [11,0,7,508,3]
> 142 lui ab31 threshold_3[31:12]
> 143 li ab31 threshold_3[11:0] #every fourth row, start with row7 = threshold_3

Listing 1 is extracted from the initialization phase, where the address bank and crossbar array are prepared for the execution of the interrupt handler. This specific routine initializes the threshold values required for the end-of-day preprocessing. In this case study, for simplicity, it is assumed that the thresholds for each specific period (e.g., morning, afternoon) remain constant across all days. Lines 125 and 126 use the laui and lai instructions to populate address bank slot ab31 with an addressing configuration. The “Column A” field is set to 11, as the threshold values are expected in the eleventh column in the interrupt handler. The “Column B” field is irrelevant here, as the lui and 

li instructions disregard it. “Start Row” is set to 4, since this is the first row that sensor data is stored to, and “Num Rows” is set to 508, in order to fill the entire column. To facilitate the case study’s requirement for four periods per day, a “Stride” of 3 is used, which ensures that the subsequent load-immediate instructions write the threshold_0 value to every fourth row (rows 4, 8, 12, etc.), populating the entire memory space allocated for that time of day. This process is repeated for the three remaining periods, with the “Start Row” incremented by one for each iteration. By line 143, the threshold value for every row is initialized. 

Dynamic Addressing: Static addressing is sufficient for initializing constants and computing on data whose location is fixed, but often this is not sufficient. Processing sequential data, such as a stream of sensor measurements, requires the ability to update memory pointers dynamically, or during program execution. In the proposed ISA, this is done by storing address configurations as data within the crossbar array, and using them as inputs to arithmetic instructions. This pattern is illustrated in Listing 2. 49 Listing 2: Dynamically managing the sample pointer             

> 172 #ingest sensor data
> 173 la ab31 ab0 #load sample_ptr to ab31
> 174 lio ab31
> 175 add ab31 #add sample to column 8 [Lines 176–187 skipped] 182 add ab1 #iterate sample_pointer

In this snippet, address bank slot ab0 acts as a “pointer to a pointer”. It holds a static address configuration targeting [Row 0, Col 0], where a 

32 -bit word representing the location of the current sample is stored. To use this “pointer”, Line 173 executes the la instruction, which reads the data from [Row 0, Col 0] and writes it to address bank slot ab31 . After Line 173 has finished, ab31 holds a configuration where “Column A” points to the current sample location, “Column B” points to Column 8 (where all of the samples in a period are accumulated), and “Start Row” points to the current period’s row. The subsequent lio and add instructions on Lines 174-175 use the dynamically updated address configuration to ingest the sensor data and accumulate it into the correct memory locations for that specific measurement cycle. The most distinctive feature of dynamic addressing in the proposed ISA is how pointers are incremented. In Line 182, the add instruction is invoked using address bank slot ab1 . This slot is configured with a static address configuration whose operand ‘A’ is at [Row 0, Col 1], and operand ‘B’ is at [Row 0, Col 0] (the location of sample_ptr used in Line 173). The data in operand ‘A’ is configured to hold a static value of [1,0,0,0,0] (interpreted as an address configuration). When the add instruction is completed, only the “Column A” field of sample_ptr has been incremented, and everything else is left unchanged. It is important to note that since the address configuration is simply treated as a 32-bit integer during addition, it is difficult to check for overflow here, and thus code should be written in a manner that avoids the possibility of overflow entirely. The next time the interrupt handler triggers and Line 173 is executed, the newly incremented address is loaded into ab31 , successfully targeting the next column in the array for the next sample. Iterating the “Start Row” field when a new period starts is handled analogously elsewhere in the code. This mechanism allows the architecture to handle complex data structures and iterative loops dynamically. 

Semi-Static Addressing: In many scenarios when writing assembly for the proposed architecture, an address configuration is neither entirely static nor entirely dynamic. A frequent requirement is to maintain a dynamically calculated field, such as the “Start Row”, while explicitly setting other fields, such as the “Column A” or “Column B”. Since addresses can be stored as data within the crossbar array, the architecture allows for this hybrid approach, 50 using bit-wise masking to “edit” specific fields of a pointer without losing the dynamic context. This technique is exemplified in Listing 3.                         

> Listing 3: Setting the column fields of an existing addressing configuration
> 195 lui ab6 00000000111111111111
> 196 li ab6 111111111111 #day_ptr_modifier = [0,0,511,511,63]
> 197 and ab6 #reset day_ptr "Column A" and "Column B" fields
> 198 lui ab6 10001001000000000000
> 199 li ab6 000000000000 #day_ptr_modifier = [8,9,0,0,0]
> 200 or ab6 #day_ptr "Column A" = 8, "Column B" = 9
> 201 la ab31 ab4
> 202 srai ab31 3 #divide sums by 8 to obtain averages

In this snippet, the program prepares to calculate the average temper-ature for each period at the end of a day. The data pointed to by ab4 ,referred to as day_ptr , already contains a dynamically updated “Start Row” that points to the first row of the day. It also has a “Num Rows” of 3 in order to target all four periods of the day. However, to perform the averag-ing, the addressing configuration needs to be updated to target Column 8 (where samples are accumulated) and Column 9 (the temporary location for an immediate value). This “semi-static” addressing is achieved through a bitwise masking pro-cess. First, in lines 195-197, a bitmask is loaded into operand ‘A’ of ab6 that contains zeros in the positions corresponding to the “Column A” and “Col-umn B” fields and ones elsewhere. Operand ‘B’ of ab6 points to the day_ptr ,so the and instruction resets its “Column A” and “Column B” fields. Then, in lines 198-200, a new value is loaded into operand ‘A’ of ab6 containing the binary values to target Column 8 and Column 9. An or instruction then “pastes” these values into the previously cleared fields of day_ptr .The final address configuration, loaded into address bank slot ab31 in line 201, points to the dynamically determined rows, and the statically de-termined columns required for the subsequent shift operation. 

7.2.2. Discussion 

The implementation of assembly code for the intelligent sensor node case study provides a good basis for discussing the broader implications of the proposed architecture and instruction set. This sub-section looks at the energy consumption in the case study and explores potential improvements to the proposed architecture and instruction set. 

Energy Analysis: The primary motivation for this architecture is to enable ultra-low power computation for edge devices. By counting how many of each instructions are executed every day, and using the results in Table 13, the total computational energy for a full day of operation was estimated to be 19.5 μJ . Additionally, 132 sense amplifier reads must be invoked, which 51 consume a small amount of power as well. Missing from this estimate is the power consumed through static leakage in the CMOS control logic, but since the design is in an idle state most of the time, this is not likely to introduce a significant difference. To contextualize this figure, it represents significantly better power per-formance when compared to SoA CMOS ultra-low-power microcontrollers. Commonly used sensor-node microcontrollers, such as the Texas Instruments MSP430 or Ambiq Apollo series, typically consume on the order of 10-100 mJ 

of energy per day purely due static leakage currents during deep sleep [1]. By performing all computation directly on non-volatile memristors, the pro-posed architecture achieves power performance orders of magnitude better than SoA ultra-low-power microcontrollers for sporadic activity cycles. Fur-thermore, in the proposed architecture, when a measurement is made, data only moves from the sensor to the crossbar array. In a traditional microcon-troller, data has to move from the sensor, to memory, to the processor, and back to memory again. This reduction in data movement is also expected to provide significant improvements to power performance. These results suggest that the energy bottleneck for edge devices can be shifted away from data storage and processing and onto the peripheral components. 

Potential Changes to the Proposed Architecture and ISA: While the case study successfully demonstrates the proposed design’s viability, analysis of the assembly code reveals some pain-points that could poten-tially be alleviated. The largest of which lies in the processes required to manipulate the address bank. As shown in Listing 3, editing a single field of an address configuration requires loading full 32-bit masks and invoking successive and and or instructions. To reduce this, the ISA could be expanded to include a further suite of dedicated address-manipulation instructions. For example, immediate in-structions could be introduced to directly overwrite individual fields of an ad-dress bank slot, such as an immediate instruction that can set either Column A or Column B. This would be advantageous, since it reduces the complex-ity of the code, less instructions would have to be performed, and ultimately it would reduce the energy costs associated with managing addresses. The downside is that this would stray further from the official RISC-V specifica-tion, making adapting existing compilers more difficult. Furthermore, intro-ducing these highly specialized and architecture-specific instructions conflicts with the “Reduced” philosophy of RISC architectures, pushing the ISA into CISC territory. A second potential modification concerns the global bit-width of the ar-chitecture. The current proposal uses 32-bit data words to maintain compli-52 ance with the RV32I standard. However, sensor data tends to not need such high precision. For example, the commonly used Texas Instruments TMP102 temperature sensor only has a precision of 12 bits [23]. When operating ex-clusively with 12-bit measurements, most of the space in the crossbar array is wasted. Adopting a 16-bit version of the architecture could be advantageous for sensor-node applications. Half the bit-width theoretically halves the energy and latency of most instructions, and would allow for twice the number of samples to be stored within the same physical footprint. 16 bits is also still enough headroom to allow for the accumulation of many 12-bit samples without overflow. Adopting the proposed architecture to operate on 16-bit data would re-quire some adjustments to the addressing schema. First, the addressing configurations themselves would have to change. Since a 512-bit row would now hold 32 words instead of 16, the “Column A” and “Column B” fields would each require an additional bit (5 bits each). To accommodate this, the bits allotted for the “Stride” field would simply be reduced by 2. Alterna-tively, the size of the crossbar array could simply be halved, opting for only the energy efficiency and latency advantages. Additionally, since addresses remain as 32 bit values, the dynamic addressing described in Listings 2 and 3 would no longer work, and the previously mentioned address management instructions would have to be adopted as well. While a transition to 16 bits would offer substantial performance and density benefits, this would also represent a significant departure from the RISC-V standard. 

8. Conclusions and Future Work 

8.1. Conclusions 

In this thesis, we propose and evaluate a standalone, general-purpose IMC architecture tailored specifically for ultra-low-power edge devices. The rapidly expanding field of edge computing requires hardware that can operate under exceptionally strict energy constraints. Traditional CMOS microcon-trollers are fundamentally limited in this domain by the von Neumann bot-tleneck, which wastes significant power moving data across memory buses, and by the static power leakage inherent to volatile memory. The typical design process for memristive IMC architectures in the SoA focuses predom-inantly on accelerators or co-processors that rely on a conventional CPU to orchestrate program flow. This approach fails to fully exploit the memris-tor’s potential in a standalone microcontroller and lacks integration with a Turing-complete ISA. We, therefore, proposed a comprehensive architecture 53 that unifies data storage and computation into a single physical medium us-ing the Serial IMPLY stateful logic paradigm, eliminating the energy waste of a data bus. We successfully mapped the standard RV32I RISC-V instruction set onto the proposed memristive architecture. Since RISC-V is fundamentally a load-store architecture constrained by a small register file, we introduced a novel address bank schema to facilitate addressing within a large two-dimensional memory space. This structure overcomes traditional register limitations and enables static, dynamic, and the novel semi-static address-ing patterns. Furthermore, the address bank unlocks the native vector par-allelism of the architecture through strided and multi-row configurations, allowing single instructions to execute across hundreds of rows simultane-ously. The functional completeness and ultra-low-power capabilities of the ar-chitecture were validated through both circuit-level simulations and an appli-cation case study. Using the ATOMIC simulation framework, we determined the energy, latency, and area metrics for each instruction in the proposed in-struction set. These metrics were then applied to evaluate an intelligent temperature sensor node. The custom assembly code for this application demonstrated the practical viability of the supported addressing patterns and parallel data processing. The entire daily workload for the sensor node was estimated to consume only 19 .5μJ of computational energy. When com-pared to the SoA, this represents a several-thousand-fold reduction in energy overhead, as it operates orders of magnitude below the static sleep leakage of modern ultra-low-power CMOS microcontrollers, and wastes minimal energy for data movement. 

8.2. Future Work 

The contributions presented in this thesis lay a strong foundation for the development of standalone memristive IMC architectures. Nevertheless, sev-eral promising directions for future research arise, particularly in optimizing the instruction set, expanding the software ecosystem, and the physical fab-rication. Some compelling avenues for immediate optimization are the refine-ment of addressing instructions and experimenting with smaller bit-widths. Both avenues require balancing the trade-off between the improvements they offer and the disadvantage of further straying from the RISC-V standard. To facilitate broader adoption, the development of a compiler backend is a crucial next step. Such a compiler must be capable of automatically man-aging address bank allocations and scheduling move operations to preserve variables under the two-operand destructive convention. Finally, bringing 54 the theoretical model to real-world hardware remains a vital long-term ob-jective. Conducting full-array SPICE simulations could also be useful to more precisely evaluate the energy use of computation in the crossbar array. In summary, this thesis presents a versatile framework for advancing stan-dalone memristive computing, paving the way for highly efficient ultra-low-power edge architectures aligned with the needs of next-generation sensing systems. 

References 

[1] U. G. Shinde, T. Luhmann, J. Klueppel, T. Steinmann, L. M. Comella, W. Yu, S. J. Rupitsch, P. Woias, Task-specific energy profiling for microcontroller selection in energy-autonomous wireless sensor nodes, IEEE Sensors Journal 25 (21) (2025) 40609–40622. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2025.3609827. [2] M. Horowitz, 1.1 computing’s energy problem (and what we can do about it), in: 2014 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers (ISSCC), 2014, pp. 10–14. doi:10.1109/ISSCC.2014.6757323. [3] N. TaheriNejad, In-memory computing: Global energy consumption, carbon footprint, technology, and products status quo (2024) 1–6. [4] L. Chua, Memristor-the missing circuit element, IEEE Transactions on Circuit Theory 18 (5) (1971) 507–519. doi:10.1109/TCT.1971.1083337. [5] J. Borghetti, G. Snider, P. Kuekes, J. J. Yang, D. Stewart, S. Williams, Memristive switches enable stateful logic operations via material impli-cation, Nature 464 (2010) 873–6. doi:10.1038/nature08940. [6] M. S. Q. Truong, E. Chen, D. Su, L. Shen, A. Glass, L. R. Carley, J. A. Bain, S. Ghose, Racer: Bit-pipelined processing using resistive memory, in: MICRO-54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture, MICRO ’21, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2021, p. 100–116. doi:10.1145/3466752.3480071. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3466752.3480071 

[7] O. Leitersdorf, D. Leitersdorf, J. Gal, M. M. Dahan, R. Ronen, S. Kvatinsky, Aritpim: High-throughput in-memory arithmetic, IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing 11 (2022) 720–735. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:249538709 

55 [8] F. Seiler, P. M. Hinkel, A. Jantsch, N. TaheriNejad, Atomic: Automatic tool for memristive imply based circuit-level simulation and validation, in: 2025 21st International Conference on Synthesis, Modeling, Analysis and Simulation Methods and Applications to Circuit Design (SMACD), 2025, pp. 1–4. [9] S. Kvatinsky, A. Kolodny, U. C. Weiser, E. G. Friedman, Memristor-based imply logic design procedure, in: 2011 IEEE 29th Interna-tional Conference on Computer Design (ICCD), 2011, pp. 142–147. doi:10.1109/ICCD.2011.6081389. [10] D. B. Strukov, G. Snider, D. R. Stewart, R. S. Williams, The missing memristor found, Nature 453 (2008) 80–83. [11] S. Kvatinsky, D. Belousov, S. Liman, G. Satat, N. Wald, E. G. Fried-man, A. Kolodny, U. C. Weiser, Magic—memristor-aided logic, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs 61 (11) (2014) 895–899. doi:10.1109/TCSII.2014.2357292. [12] S. Gupta, M. Imani, T. Rosing, Felix: Fast and energy-efficient logic in memory, in: 2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), 2018, pp. 1–7. doi:10.1145/3240765.3240811. [13] D. Radakovits, N. Taherinejad, Behavioral leakage and inter-cycle vari-ability emulator model for rerams (BELIEVER), CoRR abs/2103.04179 (2021). arXiv:2103.04179. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.04179 

[14] E. Lehtonen, M. Laiho, Stateful implication logic with memristors, 2009 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Nanoscale Architectures (2009) 33–36. [15] A. Waterman, Design of the risc-v instruction set architecture, Ph.D. thesis, EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley (Jan 2016). URL http://www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2016/EECS-2016-1.html 

[16] F. Seiler, N. TaheriNejad, An improved serial imply adder algorithm for efficient neural network applications, in: 2025 IEEE 16th Latin America Symposium on Circuits and Systems (LASCAS), 2025, pp. 1–5. [17] N. Kaushik, B. Srinivasu, Implementation of imply-based memristive subtractor, in: 2022 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Nanotechnology (NANO), 2022, pp. 523–526. doi:10.1109/NANO54668.2022.9928713. 56 [18] S. Kvatinsky, G. Satat, N. Wald, E. G. Friedman, A. Kolodny, U. C. Weiser, Memristor-based material implication (imply) logic: Design principles and methodologies, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 22 (10) (2014) 2054–2066. doi:10.1109/TVLSI.2013.2282132. [19] N. Brum, Pyltspice (2024). URL https://github.com/nunobrum/PyLTSpice 

[20] D. Radakovits, M. Jungwirth, S. M. Laube, N. TaheriNe-jad, Second (v2.0) LTSpice implementation of VTEAM, https://www.ict.tuwien.ac.at/staff/taherinejad/projects/ memristor/files/vteam2.asc, https://www.ict.tuwien.ac.at/staff/ taherinejad/projects/memristor/files/vteam2.asy (September 2019). [21] S. Kvatinsky, M. Ramadan, E. G. Friedman, A. Kolodny, Vteam: Ageneral model for voltage-controlled memristors, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs 62 (8) (2015) 786–790. doi:10.1109/TCSII.2015.2433536. [22] Knowm sdc memristors, last accessed Feb 2024 (knowm.org/downloads/Knowm_Memristors.pdf). URL https://knowm.org/downloads/Knowm_Memristors.pdf 

[23] Texas Instruments, TMP102 Low-Power Digital Temperature Sensor With SMBus and Two-Wire Serial Interface in SOT563, datasheet SBOS451J (Revised Dec. 2018) (Dec 2018). URL https://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/tmp102.pdf 

Appendix A. Assembly for Temperature Sensor Node                                      

> 1#|================================================================|
> 2#|============================Reference===========================|
> 3#|================================================================|
> 45#31 28 27 24 23 15 14 650
> 6#Address Config template : [xxxx][xxxx][xxxxxxxxx][xxxxxxxxx][xxxxxx]
> 7#col1 col2 row n_rows stride
> 8910 #Address Bank:
> 11 #ab0 sample_ptr
> 12 #ab1 sample_ptr_iter
> 13 #ab2 period_ptr
> 14 #ab3 period_ptr_iter
> 15 #ab4 day_ptr
> 16 #ab5 day_ptr_iter
> 17 #ab6 day_ptr_modifier
> 18 #ab7 day_ptr_copy1
> 19 #ab8 day_ptr_copy2
> 20 #ab9 compare_ptr

57 21 #ab10 count_superthreshold_ptr  

> 22

#ab11 compare_modifier  

> 23

#ab12 count_superthreshold_modifier  

> 24

#ab13  

> 25

#ab14  

> 26

#ab15  

> 27

#ab16 sample_count  

> 28

#ab17 max_samples  

> 29

#ab18 period_count  

> 30

#ab19 max_periods  

> 31

#ab20 day_count  

> 32

#ab21 max_days  

> 33

#ab22 count_iter  

> 34

#ab23  

> 35

#ab24  

> 36

#ab25  

> 37

#ab26  

> 38

#ab27  

> 39

#ab28  

> 40

#ab29 temp  

> 41

#ab30 temp  

> 42

#ab31 temp  

> 43 44 45

#|================================================================|  

> 46

#|=======================Initialization Code======================|  

> 47

#|================================================================|  

> 48 49

#set up address bank  

> 50

laui ab0 00000000000000000000  

> 51

lai ab0 000000000000 #ab0 = [0,0,0,0,0] (address of sample_ptr)  

> 52

laui ab1 00010000000000000000  

> 53

lai ab1 000000000000 #ab1 = [1,0,0,0,0] (address of sample_ptr_iter)  

> 54

laui ab2 00100000000000000000  

> 55

lai ab2 000000000000 #ab2 = [2,0,0,0,0] (address of period_ptr)  

> 56

laui ab3 00110010000000000000  

> 57

lai ab3 000000000000 #ab3 = [3,2,0,0,0] (address of period_ptr_iter)  

> 58

laui ab4 01000000000000000000  

> 59

lai ab4 000000000000 #ab4 = [4,0,0,0,0] (address of day_ptr)  

> 60

laui ab5 01010100000000000000  

> 61

lai ab5 000000000000 #ab5 = [5,4,0,0,0] (address of day_ptr_iter)  

> 62

laui ab6 01100000000000000000  

> 63

lai ab6 000000000000 #ab6 = [6,4,0,0,0] (address of day_ptr_modifier)  

> 64

laui ab7 01000111000000000000  

> 65

lai ab7 000000000000 #ab7 = [4,7,0,0,0] (day_ptr_copy1)  

> 66

laui ab8 01001000000000000000  

> 67

lai ab8 000000000000 #ab8 = [4,8,0,0,0] (day_ptr_copy2)  

> 68

laui ab9 01110000000000000000  

> 69

lai ab9 000000000000 #ab9 = [7,0,0,0,0] (address of compare_ptr)  

> 70

laui ab10 10000000000000000000  

> 71

lai ab10 000000000000 #ab10 = [8,0,0,0,0] (address of count_superthreshold_ptr)  

> 72

laui ab11 10010111000000000000  

> 73

lai ab11 000000000000 #ab11 = [9,7,0,0,0] (address of compare_modifier)  

> 74

laui ab12 10101000000000000000  

> 75

lai ab12 000000000000 #ab12 = [10,8,0,0,0] (address of count_superthreshold_modifier)  

> 76 77

laui ab16 00000000000000001000  

> 78

lai ab16 000000000000 #ab16 = [0,0,1,0,0] (address of sample_count)  

> 79

laui ab17 00010000000000001000  

> 80

lai ab17 000000000000 #ab17 = [1,0,1,0,0] (address of max_samples)  

> 81

laui ab18 00100000000000001000  

> 82

lai ab18 000000000000 #ab18 = [2,0,1,0,0] (address of period_count)  

> 83

laui ab19 00110000000000001000  

> 84

lai ab19 000000000000 #ab19 = [3,0,1,0,0] (address of max_periods)  

> 85

laui ab20 01000000000000001000  

> 86

lai ab20 000000000000 #ab20 = [4,0,1,0,0] (address of day_count)  

> 87

laui ab21 01010000000000001000  

> 88

lai ab21 000000000000 #ab21 = [5,0,1,0,0] (address of max_days)  

> 89

laui ab22 01100000000000001000  

> 90

lai ab22 000000000000 #ab22 = [6,0,1,0,0] (address of sample_count_iter)  

> 91

laui ab23 01100010000000001000  

> 92

lai ab23 000000000000 #ab23 = [6,2,1,0,0] (period_count_iter)  

> 93

laui ab24 01100100000000001000  

> 94

lai ab24 000000000000 #ab24 = [6,4,1,0,0] (day_count_iter)  

> 95

#load initial values  

> 96

lui ab0 00001000000000100000 

58 97 li ab0 000000000000 #sample_ptr = [0,8,4,0,0]  

> 98

lui ab1 00010000000000000000  

> 99

li ab1 000000000000 #sample_ptr_iter = [1,0,0,0,0]  

> 100

lui ab2 00001000000000100000  

> 101

li ab2 000000000000 #period_ptr = [0,8,4,0,0]  

> 102

lui ab3 00000000000000001000  

> 103

li ab3 000000000000 #period_ptr_iter = [0,0,1,0,0]  

> 104

lui ab4 00000000000000100000  

> 105

li ab4 000011000000 #day_ptr = [0,0,4,3,0]  

> 106

lui ab5 00000000000000100000  

> 107

li ab5 000000000000 #day_ptr_iter = [0,0,4,0,0]  

> 108 109

lui ab16 0  

> 110

li ab16 0 #sample_count = 0  

> 111

lui ab17 0  

> 112

li ab17 7 #max_samples = 7  

> 113

lui ab18 0  

> 114

li ab18 0 #period_count = 0  

> 115

lui ab19 0  

> 116

li ab19 3 #max_periods = 3  

> 117

lui ab20 0  

> 118

li ab20 0 #day_count = 0  

> 119

lui ab21 0  

> 120

li ab21 127 #max_days = 127  

> 121

lui ab22 0  

> 122

li ab22 1 #count_iter = 1  

> 123 124

#load threshold values to column 11 (assuming constant for each period throughout the year)  

> 125

laui ab31 10110000000000100111  

> 126

lai ab31 111100000011 #ab31 = [11,0,4,508,3]  

> 127

lui ab31 threshold_0[31:12]  

> 128

li ab31 threshold_0[11:0] #every fourth row, starting with row 4 = threshold_0  

> 129 130

laui ab31 10110000000000101111  

> 131

lai ab31 111100000011 #ab31 = [11,0,5,508,3]  

> 132

lui ab31 threshold_1[31:12]  

> 133

li ab31 threshold_1[11:0] #every fourth row, starting with row 5 = threshold_1  

> 134 135

laui ab31 10110000000000110111  

> 136

lai ab31 111100000011 #ab31 = [11,0,6,508,3]  

> 137

lui ab31 threshold_2[31:12]  

> 138

li ab31 threshold_2[11:0] #every fourth row, starting with row 6 = threshold_2  

> 139 140

laui ab31 10110000000000111111  

> 141

lai ab31 111100000011 #ab31 = [11,0,7,508,3]  

> 142

lui ab31 threshold_3[31:12]  

> 143

li ab31 threshold_3[11:0] #every fourth row, starting with row 7 = threshold_3  

> 144 145

#reset column 8 (where samples are accumulated)  

> 146

laui ab31 10000000000000100111  

> 147

lai ab31 111100000000 #ab31 = [8,0,4,508,0]  

> 148

lui ab31 0  

> 149

li ab31 0  

> 150 151

#reset column 10 (where super-threshold values will be counted)  

> 152

laui ab31 10100000000000100111  

> 153

lai ab31 111100000000 #ab31 = [10,0,4,508,0]  

> 154

lui ab31 0  

> 155

li ab31 0  

> 156 157

#loop and wait for interrupt  

> 158

wait:  

> 159

wfi  

> 160

beq ab20 ab21 end #if max_days reached, end program and switch to new array  

> 161 162

loop:  

> 163

beq ab0 ab0 wait  

> 164 165

end:  

> 166

nxt_array  

> 167 168

#|================================================================|  

> 169

#|========================Interrupt Handler=======================|  

> 170

#|================================================================|  

> 171 172

#ingest sensor data 

59 173 la ab31 ab0 #load sample_ptr to ab31  

> 174

lio ab31  

> 175

add ab31 #add sample to column 8  

> 176 177

#if max_samples reached, handle new period behavior  

> 178

beq ab16 ab17 sample_if  

> 179 180

#usually just iterate sample_count and sample_ptr  

> 181

add ab22 #iterate sample_count  

> 182

add ab1 #iterate sample_pointer  

> 183

beq ab0 ab0 sample_end  

> 184 185

#if max_periods reached, handle new day behavior  

> 186

sample_if:  

> 187

beq ab18 ab19 period_if  

> 188 189

#usually just iterate period_count  

> 190

add ab23  

> 191

beq ab0 ab0 period_end  

> 192 193

#compute averages and count super-threshold values  

> 194

period_if:  

> 195

lui ab6 00000000111111111111  

> 196

li ab6 111111111111 #day_ptr_modifier = [0,0,511,511,63]  

> 197

and ab6 #reset day_ptr "Column A" and "Column B" fields  

> 198

lui ab6 10001001000000000000  

> 199

li ab6 000000000000 #day_ptr_modifier = [8,9,0,0,0]  

> 200

or ab6 #day_ptr "Column A" = 8, "Column B" = 9  

> 201

la ab31 ab4  

> 202 203

#divide sums by 8 to obtain averages  

> 204

srai ab31 3  

> 205 206

#set up address bank for super-threshold counting  

> 207

mv ab7 #copy day_ptr to compare_ptr  

> 208

mv ab8 #copy day_ptr to count_superthreshold_ptr  

> 209

lui ab11 00000000111111111111  

> 210

li ab11 111111111111 #compare_modifier = [0,0,511,511,63]  

> 211

lui ab12 00000000111111111111  

> 212

li ab12 111111111111 #count_superthreshold_modifier = [0,0,511,511,63]  

> 213

and ab11 #reset compare_ptr "Column A" and "Column B"  

> 214

and ab12 #reset count_superthreshold_ptr "Column A" and "Column B"  

> 215

lui ab11 10111001000000000000  

> 216

li ab11 000000000000 #compare_modifier = [11,9,0,0,0]  

> 217

lui ab12 10011010000000000000  

> 218

li ab12 000000000000 #count_superthreshold_modifier = [9,10,0,0,0]  

> 219

or ab11 #compare_ptr "Column A" = 11, "Column B" = 9  

> 220

or ab12 #count_superthreshold_ptr "Column A" = 9, "Column B" = 10  

> 221

la ab29 ab9  

> 222

la ab30 ab10  

> 223 224

#check samples 0-7 unrolled to avoid expensive increments  

> 225

#samples 0  

> 226

lui ab6 00001111111111111111  

> 227

and ab6 #day_ptr "Column A" = 0 "Column B" = 9  

> 228

la ab31 ab4  

> 229

mv ab31  

> 230

slt ab29 #check if sample exceeds threshold  

> 231

add ab30 #increment count if sample exceeded threshold  

> 232 233

#samples 1  

> 234

lui ab6 00001111111111111111  

> 235

and ab6 #reset day_ptr "Column A"  

> 236

lui ab6 00010000000000000000  

> 237

or ab6 #day_ptr "Column A" = 1 "Column B" = 9  

> 238

la ab31 ab4  

> 239

mv ab31  

> 240

slt ab29 #check if sample exceeds threshold  

> 241

add ab30 #increment count if sample exceeded threshold  

> 242 243

#samples 2  

> 244

lui ab6 00001111111111111111  

> 245

and ab6 #reset day_ptr "Column A"  

> 246

lui ab6 00100000000000000000  

> 247

or ab6 #day_ptr "Column A" = 2 "Column B" = 9  

> 248

la ab31 ab4  

> 249

mv ab31  

> 250

slt ab29 #check if sample exceeds threshold 

60 251 add ab30 #increment count if sample exceeded threshold  

> 252 253

#samples 3  

> 254

lui ab6 00001111111111111111  

> 255

and ab6 #reset day_ptr "Column A"  

> 256

lui ab6 00110000000000000000  

> 257

or ab6 #day_ptr "Column A" = 3 "Column B" = 9  

> 258

la ab31 ab4  

> 259

mv ab31  

> 260

slt ab29 #check if sample exceeds threshold  

> 261

add ab30 #increment count if sample exceeded threshold  

> 262 263

#samples 4  

> 264

lui ab6 00001111111111111111  

> 265

and ab6 #reset day_ptr "Column A"  

> 266

lui ab6 01000000000000000000  

> 267

or ab6 #day_ptr "Column A" = 4 "Column B" = 9  

> 268

la ab31 ab4  

> 269

mv ab31  

> 270

slt ab29 #check if sample exceeds threshold  

> 271

add ab30 #increment count if sample exceeded threshold  

> 272 273

#samples 5  

> 274

lui ab6 00001111111111111111  

> 275

and ab6 #reset day_ptr "Column A"  

> 276

lui ab6 01010000000000000000  

> 277

or ab6 #day_ptr "Column A" = 5 "Column B" = 9  

> 278

la ab31 ab4  

> 279

mv ab31  

> 280

slt ab29 #check if sample exceeds threshold  

> 281

add ab30 #increment count if sample exceeded threshold  

> 282 283

#samples 6  

> 284

lui ab6 01101111111111111111  

> 285

and ab6 #reset day_ptr "Column A"  

> 286

lui ab6 00010000000000000000  

> 287

or ab6 #day_ptr "Column A" = 6 "Column B" = 9  

> 288

la ab31 ab4  

> 289

mv ab31  

> 290

slt ab29 #check if sample exceeds threshold  

> 291

add ab30 #increment count if sample exceeded threshold  

> 292 293

#samples 7  

> 294

lui ab6 01111111111111111111  

> 295

and ab6 #reset day_ptr "Column A"  

> 296

lui ab6 00010000000000000000  

> 297

or ab6 #day_ptr "Column A" = 7 "Column B" = 9  

> 298

la ab31 ab4  

> 299

mv ab31  

> 300

slt ab29 #check if sample exceeds threshold  

> 301

add ab30 #increment count if sample exceeded threshold  

> 302 303

#set up for next day  

> 304

li ab18 0 #period_count = 0  

> 305

add ab24 #increment day_count  

> 306

lui ab6 00001111111111111111  

> 307

and ab6 #reset day_ptr "Column A"  

> 308

add ab5 #increment day_ptr  

> 309 310

#set up for next period  

> 311

period_end:  

> 312

add ab3 #iterate period_ptr  

> 313

laui ab31 00100000000000000000  

> 314

lai ab31 000000000000 #ab31 = [2,0,0,0,0]  

> 315

mv ab31 #sample_ptr = period_ptr  

> 316

li ab16 0 #sample_count = 0  

> 317 318

sample_end:  

> 319

mret 

61