Title: High-Performance Low-Power Adiabatic Systolic Array Design in Advanced FinFET Nodes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.30058v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 02:12:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# High-Performance Low-Power Adiabatic Systolic Array Design in Advanced FinFET Nodes 

Jun Yin, Liangtao Dai, Yimin Gao, and Mircea R. Stan 

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia Charlottesville, VA, USA 

{htf6ry, kvf4sf, yg9bq, mircea }@virginia.edu 

Abstract —Adiabatic logic has traditionally been recognized as a low-power solution but constrained to low clock speeds to preserve adiabatic behavior. For advanced FinFET nodes, however, clock frequencies have plateaued due to power/thermal concerns (dark silicon) even as the intrinsic device speeds have continued to scale . This convergence opens an opportunity for adiabatic logic to maintain adiabatic behavior even at GHz clocks. We demonstrate an adiabatic logic (AL) design methodology through a MAC systolic array implemented in commercial 16 nm FinFET technology with a resonant 4-phase power clock (PCK) generator, including digital-to-AL and AL-to-digital interfaces. Simulations show that the AL MAC systolic array at 1 GHz achieves power reductions of up to 42% and 36% at the core and system levels, respectively, compared to digital counterparts. Scaling to more advanced nodes should provide even better power/performance metrics. 

Index Terms —Adiabatic logic, Systolic array, Multiplication-accumulation, 4-phase power clock generator, IoT, FinFET tech-nology node, Low power 

I. INTRODUCTION The proliferation of AI workloads has intensified demand for efficient hardware architectures capable of accelerating matrix multiplication, a fundamental operation across modern computing, image processing, and signal processing applica-tions [1]–[3]. As model sizes and throughput requirements continue to grow, achieving high energy efficiency at sustained clock frequencies has become a central design challenge. Systolic arrays arrange multiply-accumulate (MAC) units in a regular two-dimensional grid, streaming data through orches-trated patterns that maximize data reuse and minimize memory bandwidth requirements [4], [5]. Their regular structure and high arithmetic intensity make them a preferred building block in modern AI accelerators, from Google’s TPU [2] to nu-merous edge inference engines. However, conventional digital systolic arrays face the CV 2f power consumption curse with power surging dramatically as frequencies increase [6]. Several architectural optimizations have been proposed to improve systolic array efficiency. Approximate computing techniques [7] reduce power but sacrifice accuracy, limiting applicability to error-tolerant workloads. Separating multipliers from adders in tree topologies [8] improves latency at the cost of increased area and hardware complexity. Dataflow optimizations such as 

This research was supported in part by an endowed Virginia Microelectron-ics Consortium (VMEC) professorship and by gift awards from Intel, AMD, and Northrop Grumman. 

Fig. 1. Intrinsic FO4 delay, 100 × FO4 delay and clock period over the years. While the intrinsic FO4 delay has continued to scale, the clock frequencies/periods have plateaued. Traditionally adiabatic circuits have to run 100 × lower than their conventional counterparts in order to maintain adiabatic behavior, which, for advanced nodes can be obtained at about the same clock frequencies as conventional digital. 

the diagonal-input permutated weight-stationary (DiP) scheme [9] improve energy efficiency but still consume hundreds of milliwatts at 1 GHz, limiting suitability for edge deployment. These approaches all operate within the conventional digital 

CV 2f power framework, leaving fundamental room for im-provement. Adiabatic Logic (AL) circuits [10] offer a fundamentally different approach by recovering and reusing charge from load capacitances rather than dissipating it as heat. Historically, AL has been considered impractical for high-performance applications because maintaining adiabatic behavior requires transition times that far exceed the circuit’s RC time-constant, forcing operation at low clock frequencies. However, as shown in Fig. 1, advanced FinFET technology nodes have driven RC time-constants into the picosecond range, while clock frequencies have plateaued at around 1 GHz due to power and thermal constraints. This convergence means that AL circuits can now maintain adiabatic behavior at the same clock frequencies used by conventional digital logic, opening the door to high-performance low-power accelerators for HPC and AI workloads. We propose a design methodology for high performance low power AL through the circuit design of an AL MAC systolic array using positive feedback adiabatic logic (PFAL) gates on commercial 16 nm FinFET technology, with an efficient reso-arXiv:2608.30058v1 [cs.AR] 30 Aug 2026 Fig. 2. Structural diagram of traditional MAC unit. 

nant 4-phase power clock (PCK) generator optimized to drive the array. The proposed AL circuits sustain 1 GHz clock rates with substantially reduced power, enabling a new generation of energy-efficient accelerators. The major contributions are:  

> •

We introduce a bottom-up methodology to build PFAL gates, complex MAC blocks, and dual-rail digital to AL and AL to digital conversion circuits.  

> •

We design a novel resonant 4-phase AC PCK sinewave generator using coupled 2-phase LC oscillators with shunt NFETs. To achieve high efficiency, the transistors are optimized such that the PCK generator can deliver sinusoidal clocks to AL circuits at low input power.  

> •

We build and simulate a simple AL MAC systolic array integrated with digital FIFOs and converters and powered by the sinewave PCK. The AL MAC systolic array with peripherals and PCK included shows significant power reduction (low-power) while maintaining the frequency (high-performance) of conventional digital MAC systolic arrays. II. BACKGROUND 

A. Traditional digital MAC 

Fig. 2 shows a digital MAC unit [11] that performs mul-tiplication in the first stage and accumulation in the second. In multiplication, multi-bit operands are clocked through D-flip-flops (DFF) to carry-save adder (CSA)-based multiplier blocks generating partial products via bitwise AND operations. Parallel CSA arrays compress intermediate stages to two rows, avoiding carry propagation delays and enabling efficient shift-and-add operations, especially when pipelined. Intermediate registers balance delays between the multiplier and the accu-mulator stages for high clock frequencies. For accumulation, a Kogge-Stone prefix adder (KSA) propagates carries rapidly for parallel, efficient addition. On the first operation, the intermediate product is added with 0; on subsequent cycles, it is added with the previous accumulated sum latched in the accumulator register, which feeds back each cycle. 

B. Adiabatic logic with FinFET 

AL is a design methodology that minimizes power by recovering and reusing the charge stored on the transistor capacitances [12]. Unlike traditional CMOS circuits that dis-sipate energy as heat, adiabatic logic uses a time-varying AC power supply to ensure transistors switch only when voltage differences are minimal and that the charging and discharging  

> Fig. 3. (a) The schematic of a resonant 2-phase AC PCK generator with capacitive and resistive loads, and (b) the generated 2-phase sinusoidal PCKs.

are slower than the time-constant of the circuit thereby re-ducing power loss. The energy per cycle for adiabatic circuits (EAL ) is given quantitatively by [13]: 

EAL = 2CV 2

> dd

RC ttran 

(1) where R is the ON-resistance of the transistor, C is the capacitance of the circuits ( RC is also known as the technol-ogy time-constant), Vdd is the power supply voltage amplitude, and ttran is the transient time (of a trapezoidal or sinewave clock) which is proportional to the clock period. This Equation 1 differs from conventional digital CMOS where the energy per cycle CV 2 

> dd

is independent of transition time. For AL to consume less power than traditional CMOS, the transition time must exceed 4RC/α (α is the switching activity) which poses a challenge for high-performance which requires high clock frequencies. However, as shown in Fig. 1, modern FinFET technologies with ps-range RC time-constants can enable significant power savings at GHz frequencies in adiabatic circuits [6], [14]. III. AC P OWER CLOCK GENERATION 

Traditionally AL circuits have used a trapezoidal clock scheme with 4 phases [15] evaluate, hold, recover, and wait ,but such clocks are hard to generate efficiently, and the overall power is worse than for other PCK shapes such as blip, or es-pecially sinewave [16]. The number of clock phases is another design consideration, with 1-, 2-, and 4-phase schemes having been explored. [17]–[19]. The AL MAC systolic array uses a 4-phase sinewave AC PCK scheme with a novel approach to efficiently generating the four synchronized phases. The design further eliminates external tank capacitors by using the implicit capacitive loads as part of the clock generator. This requires a co-design of the circuit and clock generator which complicates the design phase but results in savings in area and power. The building block for the 4-phase PCK is a 2-phase resonant clock generator as shown in Fig. 3 (a), comprising cross-coupled inverters with a flying inductor L between outputs (PCK1 and PCK3). With the DC supply VDD, charges oscillate through L between load capacitors C Load , generating sinusoidal waves that diminish due to resistive losses. Switches P1 and N2 replenish the dissipated energy by connecting to VDD and ground at intervals controlled by the resonant circuit itself, producing two 180-degree phase-shifted sinusoidal PCKs at 1 GHz as shown in Fig. 3 (b). The power delivered to loads is PLoad , while switching losses occur in the four transistors and in the resistive load. Since the oscillation frequency Fig. 4. RLoad and C Load extraction of (a) PCK1 and (b) PCK3 under ideal AC sources at 1 GHz and 0.8 V.     

> Fig. 5. (a) The efficiency vs. R Load of the 2-phase PCK generator across different C Load . (b) The efficiency vs. N finger with both fixed loads (162 fF, 7.5 k Ω) and 1 GHz.
> Fig. 6. The proposed resonant 4-phase AC PCK generator.

depends on the loads, the resistive and capacitive values of the load must be accurately estimated [20], [21]. Using AC voltage sources driving varying numbers of AL buffers, Fig. 4 shows that, as expected, R Load1 (R Load2 ) decreases while CLoad1 (C Load2 ) increases with the AL buffer count. For a 2 ×2AL MAC systolic array with extracted C Load of 162 fF and approximately 2550 AL buffers, the R Load is ∼7.5 k Ω. Thus, CLoad1 = C Load2 = 162 fF and R Load1 = R Load2 = 7.5 k Ω are chosen to mimic the AL loads, and the efficiency is calculated as PLoad /P total × 100% . Clock generator efficiency depends on CLoad , R Load , and the N finger of FinFETs in the cross-coupled inverter. As shown in Fig. 5 (a), for fixed C Load , efficiency initially increases with R Load due to decreased conduction losses, then drops as resonant energy transfer becomes under-utilized and reactive current losses dominate. At C Load = 162 fF and R Load = 7.5 k Ω, efficiency remains above 70%. Efficiency also increases with Nfinger due to increased negative gain for driving loads, as shown in Fig. 5 (b), but drops with larger Nfinger due to increased switching capacitance and power loss. Since efficiency improves marginally from 2 to 3 fingers, 2 fingers are chosen to minimize area overhead. To generate 4-phase PCK with the 2-phase clock generator, as shown in Fig. 6, two sets of 2-phase clock generators are required. In addition, they also need shunt NFETs at         

> Fig. 7. (a) The clock efficiency vs. R Load of the 4-phase PCK generator based on LVT, SVT, TO, and SVT+TO device under a fixed C Load of 162 fF and frequency of 1 GHz. (b) The clock efficiency vs. R Load across different C Load
> at 1 GHz.
> Fig. 8. (a) The clock efficiency vs. R Load under different N finger at a fixed CLoad of 162 fF and 1 GHz. (b) The clock efficiency vs. C Load across varied sizes of TO device at 1 GHz.

each output node, with the gate terminals coupling from the next phase outputs [22], to shift the phase of PCK by 90 degrees. Fig. 7 (a) shows 4-phase clock efficiency under different R Load with fixed C Load = 162 fF and 1 GHz frequency. Using SVT devices in cross-coupled inverters and thick oxide (TO) devices in shunt NFETs, i.e., SVT+TO, the optimized peak efficiency is 62.5% at 7 k Ω, remaining above 60% at 7.5 k Ω. Non-mixed options (LVT only, SVT only, TO only) achieve peak efficiency much less than 60%, making SVT+TO the optimal choice. SVT transistors in the cross-coupled structure provide sufficient negative gain, while TO NFETs as shunt devices reduce power consumption. Across various C Load from 100 fF to 300 fF shown in Fig. 7 (b), the SVT+TO clock generator maintains efficiency above 60% with marginal changes at 1 GHz, delivering sufficient power to AL circuits under limited input power budget. Fig. 8 (a) shows efficiency versus R Load across different FinFET N finger 

(N1-N4 and P1-P4) in the cross-coupled inverter, with NFET to PFET size ratio 1:1. At targeted AL load 162 fF, efficiency is sensitive to small R Load and small FinFET size because insufficient gain causes active losses. Efficiency becomes less sensitive as size increases. Optimal SVT FinFET size is 2 fingers at R Load = 7.5 k Ω (marked by dark blue circle). With SVT FinFET size fixed, shunt TO size must be optimized to minimize power loss. Fig. 8 (b) shows that larger TO devices reduce efficiency with the shunt NFET dominating internal losses. TO size should remain minimal or increase to 2 fingers (> 56% ) only if larger negative gain is needed for heavy loads. Fig. 9. The gate-level schematic of AL CSA with PCKs. 

IV. DESIGN OF AL MAC SYSTOLIC ARRAY 

A. AL Complex Digital Computing Logic 

The core of our AL multiplier with shift-and-add func-tionality is the AL CSA shown in Fig. 9, where dual-rail complementary signals (e.g., x and ¯x) are transmitted on single wires (this convention applies to all subsequent figures). Unlike traditional digital CSA combining an AND gate with a full adder (FA), all AL FA inputs and their complements must be buffered with AL buffers (along with all gates inside the AL FA) in order to synchronize the AL signals through the 4-phase PCK scheme. This buffering ensures: 1) the number of power supplies for the AL CSA is an exact multiple of 4, enabling array duplication without phase ordering concerns; 2) each AL CSA output synchronizes with the last PCK phase. A 4-bit operand word length is targeted to balance design complexity for this proof of concept. As shown in Fig. 10, a 4 ×4 AL CSA array is constructed to perform shift and add multiplications. Since the data flow is two-dimensional, i.e., X-axis direction (row-wise) and Y-axis direction (column-wise), and the delay between inputs and output after a set of 4-phase PCK sequence is one clock cycle, the input and output data bits should be handled carefully such that the row-wise input data bits arrive at the same time as the intermediate column-wise outputs from the previous AL CSA. Additionally, all AL outputs of the AL multiplier should be output simultaneously. To achieve the input and output synchronization, serial AL buffers are inserted at the row-wise inputs and column-wise outputs by counting how many sets of 4-phase PCKs the AL signals pass through. For example, from the left side of the AL CSA array, the row inputs of row 0 should not be buffered, while the inputs of other rows need to be buffered by increasing the number of AL buffers with a step of 4, i.e., 4 AL buffers at the left inputs of row 1, 8 AL buffers at the left inputs of row 2, and 12 AL buffers at the left inputs of row 3. Similarly, output columns 0–3 require AL buffers while columns 4–6 do not, ensuring that row-wise inputs align with intermediate carry and sum signals, and all outputs are synchronized under the 4-phase PCK scheme. A 4-bit AL KSA adds the carry-outs from the most sig-nificant bits (MSBs) of AL CSA array to their corresponding sum outputs. The 4-bit AL KSA comprises AL pre-stage cells (combining AL XOR and AND gates to generate P and G

signals), AL black cells (combining P and G from adjacent    

> Fig. 10. The gate-level schematic of AL multiplier.
> Fig. 11. Schematic of a 4-bit AL KSA, including AL black-cells, AL pre-cells, AL gray-cells, AL XOR, and AL buffers.
> Fig. 12. The schematic of a 8-bit AL KSA, including AL black-cells, AL pre-cells, AL gray-cells, AL XOR, and AL buffers.

positions using two AL AND gates and an AL OR gate), and AL grey cells (computing only G using an AL AND gate and an AL OR gate), as shown in Fig. 11. The AL black cells enable parallel prefix logic by viewing bits from the right and extending carry look-ahead distance. For example, bit 2 combines with bit 0, and bit 3 with bit 1, ensuring carry-in information from the LSB is processed in parallel without ripple delay. AL grey cells in the final stage complete the carry computation for all bits. The final step computes sum bits using AL XOR gates that take the P signal and corresponding carry-in as inputs, performed simultaneously for all 4 bits. AL buffers synchronize internal signals throughout each cell. Thus, a 4 ×4 AL CSA array and 4-bit AL KSA with buffered Fig. 13. The gate-level schematic of (a) AL delay element, and transistor-level schematic of (b) AL buffer with reset function and (c) AL buffer. 

inputs and outputs comprise a 4-bit AL multiplier. For the AL accumulation circuits, an 8-bit AL KSA, as shown in Fig. 12, is designed to implement the addition function. The design methodology of the 8-bit AL KSA is similar to that of the 4-bit AL KSA mentioned before and will not be described further. To achieve a pipeline functionality the key element is the AL delay element. Unlike traditional flip-flops, which use the clock to hold the data from the previous clock cycle, the AL delay element takes advantage of the 1 clock cycle delay between AL inputs and outputs when implementing the 4-phase PCK scheme. As shown in Fig. 13 (a), the structure of the AL delay element is simple: 4 stages of AL buffers in serial connection, with the first AL buffer, as shown in Fig. 13 (b), inserting reset inputs to reset the initial value to 0 before starting the calculation. The next 3 stages are regular AL buffers with a structure shown in Fig. 13 (c). Therefore, the AL accumulation can be achieved as follows: the product of the AL multiplier is fed to one input bus of the 8-bit AL KSA, while another input bus is reset to all 0s by the reset function of the AL delay element when the accumulation circuits start to accumulate for the first time. After the first summation, the accumulated results are delayed by one clock cycle, such that they can arrive at the input bus at the same time as the next multiplied product. 

B. AL MAC PE Design 

As shown in Fig. 14 (a), a 4-bit AL MAC PE includes AL buffers, a 4-bit AL multiplier, an 8-bit AL KSA, and AL delay elements with reset features. Each mentioned component is constructed by PFAL gates, and then its Ecyc is compared to that of the digital MAC PE constructed with similar digital logic gates. Fig. 14 (b) shows a similar tendency to [23] that Ecyc of proposed AL PE, with a minimum value across frequencies, is lower than that of the digital PE at 0.8 V. The 

Ecyc of AL PE is reduced by 50% compared to that of the digital PE at 1 GHz, which is close to the minimum Ecyc . It is notable that this approach not only lowers power consumption but also enables higher frequencies without compromising performance. 

C. Signal Conversion Circuits 

Since the AL MAC PE core receives and outputs AL signals, it needs digital-to-AL conversion (DALC) circuits at its inputs     

> Fig. 14. (a) AL MAC PE schematic and (b) Ecyc comparison between a digital PE and an AL PE across varied frequencies.
> Fig. 15. (a) Basic converter; (b) Digital-to-AL conversion (DALC) circuits; (c) AL-to-digital conversion (ALDC) circuits.

and AL-to-digital circuits at its outputs to interact with memo-ries, i.e., first-in-first-out (FIFOs) circuits and registers, which require digital inputs and outputs for applications. To achieve DALC, a basic converter [24] converts rectangular digital signals to sinusoidal using one of the 4-phase PCK supplies as shown in Fig. 15 (a). For AL inputs, transmission gates serve as the most effective pull-up structure since sinusoidal PCK passes through without distortion or threshold-induced voltage steps; gate sizing follows digital circuit principles, with energy dissipation dominated by resistance rather than delay. Since AL MAC PE core inputs are dual rails, the entire DALC schematics shown in Fig. 15 (b) requires two basic converters to encode digital signals with PCK phase 1 to complementary input signals. Inputs are gated by serial-connected digital registers to avoid metastability, and a digital inverter converts PCK phase 0 to a clock for positive-edge-triggered registers. The digital input must remain stable during precharge, hold, and recovery phases, switching only during the wait phase when PCK is at ground. AL-to-digital conversion (ALDC) circuits at the AL MAC PE core outputs, shown in Fig. 15 (c), translate AL to digital signals by adding registers to the core output, using the hold phase of PCK as the digital clock. 

D. Architecture of AL MAC Systolic Array 

Fig. 16 shows the AL MAC systolic array architecture for matrix multiplications, requiring four 4-bit input digital FIFOs: 2 for row-wise and 2 for column-wise data streams. Unlike normal digital FIFOs that output data at each clock cycle, when interacting with AL circuits, digital inputs must remain stable throughout all 4 phases. The modified FIFO takes data serially each clock cycle but holds data for 4 cycles when driving the DALC, with a resettable counter tracking hold cycles and resetting at 4. Additionally, input data must be preprocessed: for matrix multiplication A2×n ×Bn×2 producing C2×2, zeros are added at the beginning of the second row of A and second column of B to ensure correct pipelining. The FIFOs are Fig. 16. Hierarchical architecture of 2 × 2 AL MAC systolic array. Black and blue lines represent dual rail AL buses. 

> Fig. 17. The input and output waveforms of the AL MAC systolic array with digital interfaces.

synthesized using Synopsys DC compiler with modified 4-bit FIFO RTL mapped to 16 nm FinFET technology. An AL MAC PE core with peripheral signal conversion circuits forms an AL MAC tile. A 2 ×2 AL MAC systolic array contains 4 AL tiles with AL delay elements between adjacent tiles for pipelining. Tiles are categorized into four types based on DALC count, optimized for area and energy efficiency. The AL tile at the top-left corner (AL tile corner) requires both row-wise and column-wise DALCs to convert digital inputs to AL inputs for the AL MAC PE core. After 4 clock cycles of pipelining by AL delay elements, the AL tiles at the northern edge (AL tile NE) and western edge (AL tile WE) begin calculation; the AL tile NE requires only column-wise DALCs since row-wise data is already converted to AL signals, while the AL tile WE requires only row-wise DALCs. The AL tile at the bottom-right corner or center (AL tile center) receives AL data from both directions and contains no DALCs, only AL buffers to synchronize signals with the PCK phase. This architecture allows the AL tile center, AL tile NE, and AL tile WE to be duplicated multiple times for larger systolic arrays. V. S IMULATION RESULTS 

The designed 4-phase clock generator was integrated with the entire 2 ×2 AL MAC systolic array to provide valid 4-phase PCKs. Only one DC 0.8V voltage source is used as power supply. The simulation results for functional checking are shown in Fig. 17. Before the data stream inputs, the reset (rst) is set to 0 to initialize the value of the entire array to all 0s. 

A. End-to-End Functional Validation 

As the clock generator begins oscillation, rst is set to 1. Synthesized digital FIFOs are used to write data from the input data stream when the write enable (wr en) is on, while reading data to output data stream every 4 clock cycles to the DALC modules when the read enable (rd en) is on. The structure of data inputs is two matrices: X is 2 rows by 8 columns and Y

is 8 rows by 2 columns corresponding to the matrix A and B

mentioned in Section IV-D, respectively. The elements in each matrix are 4-bit integers. A digital clock converted by ALDC tracks the phase of PCK3 to synchronize the digital inputs and outputs, and has a frequency of 1 GHz. After the data pass through the AL MAC systolic array, the calculated results are pipelined out correctly and the values are held unchanged when rd en is off. 

B. System-Level Evaluation of the AL Systolic Array 

Table II shows a power consumption comparison between the 2 ×2 AL systolic array and its digital counterpart at the MAC core level, and at the system-level (including digital FIFOs). At the MAC core level, the AL systolic MAC core shows a power consumption of 174.4 μW for a reduction of 42% compared to that of the digital systolic MAC core. Notably, the total power consumption of the pure AL PEs (excluding converters) is only 38.1 μW. Thanks to our efficient 4-phase AC clock generator, the generator consumes 102.7 

μW, and thus the total delivered power, i.e., the AL system including AL MAC systolic array and digital peripherals, is 537.1 μW. Compared to the digital power of 839.5 μW, the AL system gives a very promising power saving of 36% at 1 GHz. For scaling up the size of the AL MAC systolic array, the system architecture must recognize the strengths and constraints of AL. Given the power consumption of the 2 ×2digital and AL MAC systolic arrays at 1 GHz and 0.8 V, the Ecyc of various size systolic arrays can be estimated to provide further insights. In Fig. 18 the E cyc of the 2 ×2 digital MAC systolic array with peripherals is set as baseline while the E cyc 

of other designs with different sizes is normalized based on it. As the array size increases, the E cyc of both digital and AL MAC systolic arrays increases. Notably, the AL MAC systolic array with peripherals always achieves lower E cyc , and it can help reduce the Ecyc by ∼22% at a large size of 16 ×16. Table I shows a comparison of projected normalized metrics between the proposed AL systolic array and SotA digital ac-celerators from the literature. The power and energy efficiency are normalized to 16 nm and a 16 ×16 array size with INT4 throughput. Technology normalization follows DeepScaleTool [29], which provides technology-scaling factors for estimating equivalent power across CMOS nodes. For precision normal-ization, we assume that MAC datapath cost scales approxi-mately quadratically with operand bit width; therefore, one INT8 MAC is treated as equivalent to four INT4 MACs. With TABLE I COMPARISON WITH SOT A ACCELERATORS 

Metrics 2021 ISCA [25] 2023 TCAD [26] 2025 TC [27] 2023 JSSC [28] This work 

Architecture Systolic Systolic Systolic Spatial Systolic Function Digital MAC Digital MAC Digital MAC Digital MAC AL MAC Design Level System-level Core-level Core-level Core-level System-level Technology 7 nm 40 nm 16 nm 22 nm 16 nm Precision INT8 INT4 INT8 INT8 INT4 Array Size 4×128 ×128 476 4288 256 16 ×16 Frequency (GHz) 1.05 1 0.2 0.28 1Power (mW) 175000 803 10990 132.2 16.04 Energy Efficiency (TOPS/W) 0.786 1.623 0.072 1.74 7.98 Norm. Power (mW) 261 189.3 164 22.04 16.04 

Norm. Energy Efficiency (TOPS/W) 1.964 2.705 0.624 6.49 7.98      

> TABLE II POWER COMPARISON BETWEEN AL AND DIGITAL SYSTEM

Section Power μW @ 1 GHz Pure AL PEs total 38.1 AL systolic MAC core 174.4 Power supply circuits 102.7 Total delivered power 537.1 

Digital systolic MAC core 302.2 Digital total delivered power 839.5 Power saving on systolic MAC-core level 42% 

Power saving on the system level 36%   

> Fig. 18. Normalized E cyc comparison of the digital and AL MAC systolic array system for various array sizes at 1 GHz.

a normalized power consumption of 16.04 mW, our proposed AL solution achieves the lowest power footprint across all other designs, representing a 1.37 × reduction compared to the next most efficient design [28] and a 16.3 × improvement over [25]. The projected normalized energy efficiency of 7.98 TOPS/W surpasses all SotA architectures and provides a strong argument for AL to be implemented in Silicon in advanced FinFET nodes. 

C. Clock-Generator Non-Ideality Analysis 

We evaluate finite inductor quality factor by adding series resistance to the resonant inductor at 1 GHz. With 4-finger devices in the cross-coupled inverter pairs, the clock gener-ator maintains stable four-phase power-clock generation and correct AL systolic-array operation down to an effective qual-ity factor of approximately 14. Increasing the cross-coupled devices to 6 fingers provides stronger negative resistance, allowing the generator to remain functional at an effective 100M 500M 1G 2G       

> Frequency
> 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8
> Voltage (V)
> (a) 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
> Voltage (V)
> 10 1
> 10 0
> Normalized  PAVG
> Norm. to 1 GHz @ 0.8 V
> 0.1 GHz 0.5 GHz 1 GHz
> (b)
> Fig. 19. Voltage/frequency characterization of the AL systolic array with ideal four-phase PCKs. (a) Functional operating region. Green cells indicate correct operation, and red cells indicate failure. (b) Normalized average power of the functional points, normalized to the 1 GHz, 0.8 V case.

quality factor of approximately 9.8. These results indicate that finite-Q degradation primarily reduces the oscillation margin, and that the additional tank loss can be partially compensated by increasing the negative resistance of the clock generator. 

D. Voltage/Frequency Operating Region 

To characterize the AL datapath margin, we sweep the ideal four-phase PCK amplitude and operating frequency. This isolates the intrinsic voltage/frequency limit of the AL systolic array from the startup limit of the resonant clock generator. Fig. 19(a) shows that the minimum functional PCK ampli-tude increases with frequency. The AL systolic array operates correctly at 1 GHz with a PCK amplitude of 0.5 V, while 2 GHz requires approximately 0.7 V. Below these limits, the reduced device overdrive and signal swing prevent reliable charge recovery and logic evaluation within one clock period. Fig. 19(b) shows the corresponding normalized power trend. Only functionally correct points are used for energy compar-ison. At 1 GHz, reducing the PCK amplitude from 0.8 V to 0.5 V lowers the normalized average power from 1.0 to 0.165 while maintaining correct operation. 

E. Core Area and Energy-Area Analysis 

We estimate the MAC-core active area using a device-count model to avoid bias from synthesis mapping and optimization settings. The CMOS INV, BUF, AND, OR, and XOR gates use 2, 4, 6, 6, and 10 FinFET devices, respectively, while the corresponding AL gates use 6, 6, 8, 8, and 12 devices. Including the required AL phase-alignment buffers, the AL MAC core has an estimated 1.35 × active-area overhead over the static CMOS MAC core. Using the core-level power results in Table II, the AL MAC core achieves a 42% power reduction at 1 GHz, so its normalized energy per cycle is 0.58. We then compute the normalized core energy-area product (EAP) as 

Norm . EAP core = EAL ,core 

EDIG ,core 

· AAL ,core 

ADIG ,core 

= 0 .78 .

Thus, the proposed AL MAC core still achieves a 22% lower EAP than the static CMOS MAC core after accounting for the estimated active-area overhead. VI. CONCLUSIONS We present a complete adiabatic logic design methodology for MAC systolic arrays, from PFAL gate-level building blocks through system-level integration with digital peripherals. A novel resonant 4-phase power clock generator, co-designed with the AL load to eliminate external tank capacitors, drives the array at 1 GHz with over 60% efficiency. In advanced FinFET nodes, picosecond-scale RC time-constants allow adiabatic circuits to maintain charge-recovery behavior at GHz frequencies, eliminating the historical speed limitation of adiabatic logic. On 16 nm FinFET technology, the AL MAC systolic array achieves 42% and 36% power reduction at the core and system levels, respectively. Even accounting for the 1.35 × area overhead of dual-rail AL gates, the design achieves a 22% lower energy-area product than its digital counterpart. Scaled to a 16 ×16 array, the projected energy efficiency reaches 7.98 TOPS/W, surpassing state-of-the-art digital accelerators. Silicon implementation in advanced nodes is a natural next step. REFERENCES [1] M. Wang and A. P. Chandrakasan, “Flexible low power CNN accelerator for edge computing with weight tuning,” in 2019 IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference (A-SSCC) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 209–212. [2] N. P. Jouppi, C. Young, N. Patil, D. Patterson, G. Agrawal, R. Bajwa, S. Bates, S. Bhatia, N. Boden, A. Borchers et al. , “In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit,” in ACM/IEEE 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) ,2017, pp. 1–12. [3] J. Zhuang, Z. Yang, and P. Zhou, “High performance, low power matrix multiply design on ACAP: from architecture, design challenges and DSE perspectives,” in 2023 60th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–6. [4] H. T. Kung and C. E. Leiserson, “Systolic arrays (for VLSI),” in Sparse Matrix Proceedings 1978 , vol. 1. Society for industrial and applied mathematics Philadelphia, PA, USA, 1979, pp. 256–282. [5] P. A. Patil and C. Kulkarni, “A survey on multiply accumulate unit,” in 2018 Fourth International Conference on Computing Communication Control and Automation (ICCUBEA) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5. [6] J. Yin and M. Stan, “Unlocking high-performance low-power adiabatic logic computing with modern FinFET technology node,” in Proceedings of the Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI 2025 , 2025, pp. 85–90. [7] H. Waris, C. Wang, W. Liu, and F. Lombardi, “Design and evaluation of a power-efficient approximate systolic array architecture for matrix mul-tiplication,” in 2019 IEEE International Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 13–18. [8] B. Asgari, R. Hadidi, and H. Kim, “Meissa: Multiplying matrices efficiently in a scalable systolic architecture,” in 2020 IEEE 38th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 130–137. [9] A. J. Abdelmaksoud, S. Agwa, and T. Prodromakis, “DiP: A scalable, energy-efficient systolic array for matrix multiplication acceleration,” 

IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers , 2025. [10] M. P. Frank, “Perfectly adiabatic CMOS logic.” Sandia National Lab.(SNL-NM), Albuquerque, NM (United States), Tech. Rep., 2021. [11] J. J. Cavanagh, Digital computer arithmetic . McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1983. [12] S. Samanta, “Adiabatic computing: A contemporary review,” in 2009 4th International Conference on Computers and Devices for Communication (CODEC) . IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–4. [13] T. Wan, Y. Karimi, M. Stanacevic, and E. Salman, “Energy efficient AC computing methodology for wirelessly powered IoT devices,” in 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–4. [14] N. Liao, X. Cui, K. Liao, K. Ma, D. Wu, W. Wei, R. Li, and D. Yu, “Low power adiabatic logic based on FinFETs,” Science China Information Sciences , vol. 57, pp. 1–13, 2014. [15] S. Lars, “Adiabatic and clock-powered circuits,” in Low-Power CMOS Circuits . CRC Press, 2018, pp. 15–1. [16] Y. Ye and K. Roy, “Qserl: Quasi-static energy recovery logic,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits , vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 239–248, 2001. [17] S. Kim and M. C. Papaefthymiou, “True single-phase adiabatic cir-cuitry,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 52–63, 2001. [18] P. Sasipriya and V. K. Bhaaskaran, “Design of low power vlsi circuits using two phase adiabatic dynamic logic (2padl),” Journal of Circuits, Systems and Computers , vol. 27, no. 04, p. 1850052, 2018. [19] N. Jeanniot, G. Pillonnet, P. Nouet, N. Azemard, and A. Todri-Sanial, “Synchronised 4-phase resonant power clock supply for energy efficient adiabatic logic,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Rebooting Computing (ICRC) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6. [20] H. Mahmoodi-Meimand and A. Afzali-Kusha, “Efficient power clock generation for adiabatic logic,” in In 2001 IEEE International Sympo-sium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) , vol. 4. IEEE, 2001, pp. 642–645. [21] J. Yin, E. Pantoja, Y. Gao, and M. R. Stan, “A feedback self-adaptive body biasing-based RF-DC rectifier for highly-sensitive RF energy harvesting,” in 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–5. [22] H. K. Ahn, I.-C. Park, and B. Kim, “A 5-GHz self-calibrated I/Q clock generator using a quadrature LC-VCO,” in 2003 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) , vol. 1. IEEE, 2003, pp. I–I. [23] E. Amirante, A. Bargagli-Stoffi, J. Fischer, G. Iannaccone, D. Schmitt-Landsiedel et al. , “Variations of the power dissipation in adiabatic logic gates,” in Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Power And Timing Modeling, Optimization and Simulation, PATMOS , vol. 1, 2001, pp. 9–1. [24] J. Fischer, E. Amirante, A. Bargagli-Stoffi, and D. Schmitt-Landsiedel, “Adiabatic circuits: Converter for static CMOS signals,” Advances in Radio Science , vol. 1, pp. 247–251, 2003. [25] N. P. Jouppi, D. H. Yoon, M. Ashcraft, M. Gottscho, T. B. Jablin, G. Kurian, J. Laudon, S. Li, P. Ma, X. Ma et al. , “Ten lessons from three generations shaped Google’s TPUV4I: Industrial product,” in 

2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–14. [26] T. Yang, F. Ma, X. Li, F. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. He, and L. Jiang, “DTA-Trans: Leveraging dynamic token-based quantization with accuracy compensation mechanism for efficient transformer architecture,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 509–520, 2022. [27] Z. Wang, H. Fan, and G. He, “DESA: Dataflow efficient systolic array for acceleration of transformers,” IEEE Transactions on Computers ,2025. [28] P. Houshmand, G. M. Sarda, V. Jain, K. Ueyoshi, I. A. Papistas, M. Shi, Q. Zheng, D. Bhattacharjee, A. Mallik, P. Debacker, D. Verkest, and M. Verhelst, “Diana: An end-to-end hybrid digital and analog neural network soc for the edge,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits , vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 203–215, 2023. [29] S. Sarangi and B. Baas, “DeepScaleTool: A tool for the accurate estimation of technology scaling in the deep-submicron era,” in 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–5.