Title: MCHA: A Memory-Centric Hierarchical Architecture for Parallel-Sequential Computing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.04443v1

Published Time: Thu, 06 Aug 2026 00:35:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
1

# MCHA: A Memory-Centric Hierarchical Architecture for Parallel-Sequential Computing 

Daijing Shi , Hongxiao Zhao , Yihan Fu , Zhan Chen , Jiayi Li , Yihang Zhu , Anjunyi Fan , Yaoyu Tao , Yuchao Yang , Bonan Yan 

Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 

bonanyan@pku.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Emerging workloads, such as Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL), large-scale neuromorphic computing, and probabilistic graphical models, intrinsically exhibit parallel-sequential computing patterns. While these tasks demand massive parallelism to achieve high throughput, they are severely bottlenecked by irregular data access pat-terns centralized to main memory. Consequently, conven-tional architectures face fundamental limitations when ex-ecuting these workloads, primarily manifesting as global buffer saturation and memory-bound bottlenecks. To ad-dress these challenges, we propose the Memory-Centric Hi-erarchical Architecture (MCHA), a reconfigurable hardware solution tailored for parallel-sequential execution. MCHA leverages a hierarchical communication strategy that fa-cilitates distributed, inter-core data routing, thereby sig-nificantly reducing the bandwidth burden on the global memory. Complementing the hardware, MCHA introduces a novel parallel-sequential programming model that uti-lizes event-driven conditional triggers to effectively hide data transmission latency within the execution pipeline. We benchmark MCHA against a diverse suite of parallel-sequential tasks, including MARL, motor variable control, and Markov random fields. Validated through our open-source, cycle-accurate simulator, MCHA demonstrates per-formance speedups ranging from 153.06 × to 2456.96 ×

over NVIDIA A100 GPUs on MARL workloads, while main-taining robust programming flexibility across other applica-tion domains. Furthermore, the architecture successfully reduces main memory access from 96% to 5.44%. When synthesized in a 28 nm process, the MCHA implementa-tion occupies an area footprint of 2.92mm 2 and consumes 115.36 mW of power at 200 MHz. MCHA is open-sourced at https://github.com/carabdis/MCHA .Keywords: Reconfigurable Architecture, Memory-Centric, Scalable Architecture, Bulk Synchronous Parallel, Data-Driven Programming 

This paper has been accepted for publication at the 59th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO). © IEEE. Per-sonal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be ob-tained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprint-ing/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 128 256 512 1024 2048 4096 Time Cost (s) Number of Agents                                

> Global Memory Ops Local Memory Ops Compute (b) 96% 95% 94% 92% 89% 83% 010 20 30 40 10 -2 10 -2 10 010 210 410 -1 10 010 4Compute Bound Extra Memory Access Throughput / GFLOPS Arithmetic Density (FLOPs/Byte) MPE Simple Spread Switch Riddle Starcraft STORM Measured Throughput (a)
> 10 010 -1 Intensity (%) Cumulative Active Time (ms) (d) 025 50 70 100 125 150 175 200
> Compute Memory 78.9% 21.1% Memory Utilization (%) GPU Utilization (%) 72 68 64 60 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0
> MPE Switch Riddle Starcraft STORM (c)
> Memory GPU Kernel 20-1280 20-1280 20-1280 20-1280 Number of Agents Transmitted Data: 1410.6 KB 47.66× Redundant Data Essential Data: 29.6 KB

Figure 1: (a) Roofline model of the NVIDIA RTX 3090 with PSC ap-plications; (b) Simulated access operation breakdown of the GPU architecture; (c) Measured memory account and computing inten-sity; (d) Measured memory access and computing ratio during the active time. 

## 1 Introduction 

Parallel-Sequential Computing (PSC) is a hybrid paradigm that combines concurrent execution of multiple tasks with stepwise sequential operations. This approach seeks to balance computational efficiency, system scalability, and adherence to logical dependencies within a problem. In contrast to purely parallel architectures (e.g., Tensor Pro-cessing Unit [1] and the Loihi family [2]) and strictly se-quential processing, PSC decomposes complex problems into independent subproblems and interdependent phases. This allows it to leverage distributed hardware while preserv-ing data consistency, control flow, and algorithmic correct-ness. Such a design mitigates key limitations of fully parallel execution, including synchronization overhead, data races, and bottlenecks described by Amdahl’s law [3]. Simultane-ously, it avoids the inefficiency of purely sequential process-ing when applied to large-scale or computationally inten-sive workloads. By dynamically allocating parallelizable seg-ments and enforcing sequential ordering where dependen-cies exist, the PSC execution model optimizes resource uti-lization and accelerates computation for data-intensive and algorithmically complex tasks. Consequently, it is widely adopted in high-performance computing, scientific simula-tion, and related domains. arXiv:2608.04443v1 [cs.AR] 5 Aug 2026 2

PSC encompasses a broad spectrum of computing tasks, including Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) [4– 8], large-scale neuromorphic computing [9–12], and proba-bilistic graphical models [13–15]. Additionally, the Bulk Syn-chronous Parallel (BSP) paradigm, which underpins indus-trial data-intensive frameworks such as MapReduce [16], Pregel [17], Spark [18], and PolyGraph [19], is also integral to PSC. These tasks demand massive parallelism to man-age frequent, fine-grained interactions among thousands of entities (e.g. agents in MARL), with strict synchroniza-tion required at each time-step boundary. In conventional compute-centric architectures (CPUs & GPUs), these re-peated interactions induce irregular data access patterns that saturate centralized main memory. Consequently, as depicted in Figure 1(a), deploying such workloads on GPUs or many-core CPUs results in execution throttled by the global memory bandwidth (i.e. the “memory wall” [20–22]). The memory wall is exacerbated by the mismatch be-tween irregular working sets and rigid hardware hierarchies. When on-chip storage fails to capture unpredictable access patterns, the system incurs frequent, high-latency DRAM fetches, leading to severe execution stalls [12, 23, 24]. Our analysis of a grid-world MARL task on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 (Figure 1(b)) reveals a significant inefficiency: data move-ment overhead accounts for 83% to 96% of total processing operations, depending on the simulation scale. Figures 1(c) and (d) further demonstrate that the majority of execution cy-cles and energy are consumed by redundant memory traffic rather than productive computation. Even recent reconfigurable hardware with data parallelism, such as Plasticine [25, 26] or Leviathan [27], remains teth-ered to data-centric or compute-centric paradigms. Plas-ticine employs a coarse-grained reconfigurable architec-ture (CGRA) with dataflow compilation [28–30] to decou-ple memory access from task processing. However, the lack of transparency between memory and processing units still necessitates redundant data fetches. Leviathan [27] utilizes in-cache near-data computing [31–34] but re-mains burdened by frequent cache coherence manage-ment overhead for PSC tasks. Other Processing-In-Memory (PIM) or BSP domain-specific accelerators (DSAs) are ei-ther highly application-specific [35–38] or bottlenecked by global buffer (GB) access for synchronization [39–43]. Con-sequently, existing works suffer from a ping-pong effect in the sequential part of PSC, where data is repeatedly trans-mitted between main memory and multi-level caches to sat-isfy rigid cache coherence protocols [44–47]. To address this challenge, we introduce MCHA, a reconfig-urable and memory-centric multi-chip computing architec-ture. By devising a multi-tiered inter-core communication network and a data-driven programming model, MCHA ef-fectively overcomes the data-transfer bottlenecks that limit the performance of GPUs, FPGAs, and CGRAs across a broad range of PSC tasks. Our key contributions are sum-marized as follows: MARL Neuro. Model BSP Parameter Gathering Update Transformation State Write-Back 

> fff
> Figure 2: The three-stage processing of PSC tasks.

⋄ MCHA Architecture: After quantifying the inefficiency of traditional architectures for PSC workloads, we propose a novel reconfigurable hardware architecture. It replaces centralized global buffers with a distributed memory fab-ric interconnected via a Network-on-Chip (NoC), substan-tially lowering cache coherence overhead. 

⋄ Data-Driven Programming Model: We develop a formal programming model and an associated workflow to effi-ciently map PSC tasks onto the proposed reconfigurable hardware platform. 

⋄ Comprehensive Architectural Analysis Framework: We release an open-source, cycle-accurate simulator (avail-able at https://github.com/carabdis/MCHA ) to evalu-ate the throughput and scalability of MCHA under vari-ous multi-chip configurations. Through extensive experi-ments, we derive new insights into hierarchical memory bandwidth limitations and propose effective mitigation strategies. For evaluation, we implement MCHA at the register-transfer level (RTL) using the TSMC 28nm HPC+ process design kit (PDK). Experiments across a suite of MARL bench-marks [48–52] show that a 4-chip MCHA system delivers a speedup of 153.06 × to 2456.96 × compared to an NVIDIA A100 GPU. We further validate the generality of MCHA using Motor Variable Control and BSP applications, where a 32-chip configuration achieves speedups of 1.17 × and 3.90 ×

over state-of-the-art DSAs. These results underscore the efficiency of MCHA in handling irregular, memory-intensive dataflow patterns. 

## 2 Target Workload: Parallel-Sequential Patterns 

PSC Formulation As depicted in Figure 2 and Algorithm 1, PSC follows parallel-sequential patterns, which can be char-acterized by an evolving state space composed of entity-specific data. To formalize the hardware requirements of these tasks, assume the global system state at any tempo-ral index (“time” or “steps”) t as St. Each entity i within this state is represented by a multi-dimensional feature vec-tor x ni (t) ∈ Rn. The persistent structural constraints of the task, such as graph topology, environmental boundaries, or synaptic weights, are encapsulated in the parameter set p. The state transition logic is governed by an update function 

fi, which determines the feature vector of entity i at state 

t + ∆ t based on features of its neighborhood Ni and itself: ⃗            

> xni(t+ ∆ t) = fi
> (⃗
> xni(t),{⃗xnj(t)}j∈N i,p
> )
> , i = 1 ,2, . . . , m (1)

3

Algorithm 1 Parallel-Sequential Computing Tasks Input: Entities ⃗ xn(t), neighborhood N , entity number m,persistent structural parameter p Output: Final entity state ⃗ xn(tend ), total state number tend .for each t do for each i ∈ [0 , m ] do ▷ Parameter Gathering 

Ni = FindNeighbor (⃗ xni (t)) 

Di = GBAccess (Ni)

end for parfor each i ∈ [0 , m ] do ▷ Update Transformation ⃗

yni (t) = fi

(⃗

xni (t), Di, p

)

end for for each i ∈ [0 , m ] do ▷ State Write-Back ⃗

xni (t + ∆ t) = ⃗ yni (t) ▷ Multicore Cache Coherence Sync. end for end forreturn tend 

where ∆t represents the step size between different states; 

Ni denotes the set of indices for entities influencing the up-date function of the ith entity; m is the total entity population count. From an architectural perspective, the primary over-head originates from the execution of f , which we decom-pose into three stages called Parameter Gathering, Update Transformation, and State Write-Back. Bottleneck Analysis We revisit Gustafson-Barsis’s law [53] through a memory-centric analysis. Accord-ing to Gustafson’s formulation, the theoretical speedup S

achieved via parallel computing is 

S = s + (1 − s)N = N − (N − 1) s, (2) 

where N denotes the number of processors and s represents the sequential fraction of the total execution time. Consider an ideal PSC task described with Equation 1, in which m independent entities are processed concurrently across N cores, each requiring compute latency T compute 1-step .The sequential overhead arises from synchronization oper-ations, specifically, gathering and writing back results. It in-curs a data-transfer latency Tdata-transfer = CGather +CBack  

> BW

, where 

CGather and CBack denote the data sizes for synchronization among the m cores, and BW is the global memory band-width. Hence, the sequential fraction s in Equation (2) can be approximated as s = Tdata-transfer  

> Tdata-transfer +Tcompute 1-step

.

Substituting this into Equation (2) yields the memory-aware speedup approximation: 

S = N − (N − 1) 11 + T compute 1-step 

> Tdata-transfer

= N − N − 11 + T compute 1-step ·BW CGather +CBack 

.

(3) 

When memory access becomes the dominant bottleneck, i.e., T compute 1-step  

> Tdata-transfer

≪ 1 due to relatively low bandwidth, the over-all speedup S collapses to “1”, indicating no effective paral-lelism gain. Challenges. Based on the preceding analysis, memory ac-cess readily becomes the dominant performance factor due to two interconnected architectural challenges. Challenge 1: Global Buffer Saturation As shown in Fig-ure 1(b), memory access dominates the execution pro-file, highlighting the significant communication overhead from CGather and CBack . The absence of direct peer-to-peer (P2P) communication primitives between processing elements in conventional accelerators means that scaling 

m forces multiple cores to contend for global memory re-sources. This contention transforms the centralized GB into a serial bottleneck. Furthermore, in compute-centric archi-tectures, the runtime dependency of Ni on entity states in-curs substantial over-fetch overhead. The hardware must fetch entire cache lines to access non-contiguous entity data, resulting in severe bandwidth underutilization. Although the Update Transformation phase can be paral-lelized for SIMD/SIMT acceleration [54, 55], its low arith-metic intensity, often comprising only a few linear layers or element-wise nonlinearities, prevents effective utilization of computational units. Consequently, processing elements frequently stall waiting for data from saturated memory op-erations, leading to the second challenge. Challenge 2: The Memory-Bound Trap Figure 1(c–d) illus-trates that regardless of workload complexity, GPU compute utilization remains low in PSC tasks. This indicates the bot-tleneck is an architectural latency issue, not a lack of raw computational throughput. The inefficiency originates from the rigid coupling of data indexing and processing in conven-tional architectures, which enforces sequential execution for irregular memory accesses. As a result, most of the pro-cessing time T compute  

> 1−step

in Equation 3 is spent stalled, await-ing data fetches from the centralized global memory. Motivation Building on the challenges outlined above, we introduce two key solutions in MCHA: Multi-Tiered Peer-to-Peer Interconnect (Section 3): Our core idea is to parallelize the original sequential part 

Tdata −transf er with a novel programming model and reconfigurable hardware substrate. MCHA employs a multi-tiered peer-to-peer communication fabric which filters the data communication according to the transmission dis-tance, thereby eliminating contention for higher-level trans-mission paths. By removing this centralized bottleneck, MCHA avoids memory-access serialization and supports near-linear scalability. Data-Driven Programming Model (Section 4–5): The pro-posed data-driven model replaces sequential control flow with fine-grained, data-driven memory operations. Commu-nication between cores is realized through memory-mapped I/O (MMIO) FIFOs, decomposing inter-core data transfers 4

into discrete asynchronous events across the fabric. Con-sequently, these operations are hidden from the pipelines of each core, improving data independence of these cores and thus sustaining high computational throughput. 

## 3 MCHA Architecture 

The MCHA architecture employs a computing layer of Memory-Centric Cores (MCCs) interconnected by a multi-tiered NoC. This design provides high-bandwidth data trans-mission while bypassing traditional multi-level cache struc-tures to minimize multi-core cache coherence overhead. The NoC fabric is organized based on spatial access fre-quencies to maximize data locality. Compared with Cere-bras [56], which implements data locality by holding every-thing on-chip, a three-tier implementation is illustrated in Figure 3(a), providing the basis for our architectural analysis and performance evaluation. The fabricated chip die photo of our implementation is embedded in Figure 3(e). 3.1 Computing Layer: Memory-Centric Cores The fundamental component of MCHA is the MCC, which augments on-chip memory with localized processing capa-bilities to minimize data movement overhead (Figure 3(b)). To ensure deterministic pipeline control, each MCC inte-grates a RISC-V core as an embedded orchestrator, sup-ported by dual SRAM banks dedicated to instruction and data storage, respectively. Consequently, MCCs serve as the primary repositories for entity states x i, facilitating direct inter-core communication and bypassing the centralized GB and broader memory hierarchy. Inter-core communication is managed via MMIO FIFOs with explicit programs. This approach simplifies the programming abstraction while ef-fectively masking data transmission latency within the pro-cessing pipeline. 3.2 Communication Layer-1: Processing Block In MCHA, MCCs are grouped into Processing Blocks (PBs) to handle resource-intensive update functions f . When a parallel-computed function (e.g., a full matrix multiplication) exceeds single-core capabilities, a PB facilitates collabora-tive execution through MCHA Communication Layer-1. This layer ensures data coherence between neighboring cores and manages the frequent data traffic resulting from multi-core collaboration. Intra-block communication is supported by high-bandwidth FIFOs that enable near-instantaneous transfer of intermediate results. Thus, during multi-core col-laboration, entity state x i remains resident in local memory, maximizing data locality. Additionally, P2P interconnection between PBs and an independent DRAM Fabric is embed-ded in this layer to facilitate multi-block collaboration and efficient DRAM access (Figure 3(c)). 3.3 Communication Layer-2 & 3: 2D-Mesh The Communication Layer-2 and 3 of MCHA consists of a 2D-mesh topology formed by P2P interconnection link-ing neighboring PBs (Figure 3(d–e)) and high-speed chip-to-chip (C2C) interface across multi-chip boundaries (e.g., using UCIe or PCIe protocol [57, 58]). This distributed mesh serves as an active buffer, replacing multi-level caches to avoid redundant data movement caused by cache coher-ence across the memory hierarchy in multicore systems. The mesh enables P2P communication to resolve neighbor-hood Ni memory queries and other essential inter-core data access without the serialization overhead of centralized memory controllers. These links ensure system-wide data transparency, permitting the spatial distribution of complex functions f (Algorithm 1) across multiple PBs or chips when necessary. A dedicated DRAM Fabric handles off-chip traffic independently of the inter-core mesh. This decoupling iso-lates the processing fabric from high-latency off-chip mem-ory access and avoids DRAM data from being transmitted across the whole multi-tiered network to improve DRAM ac-cess efficiency. 

## 4 Data-Driven Programming Model 

Beyond conventional cache coherence management over-head, the performance of PSC workloads is limited by stalls arising from the tight coupling of data indexing and pro-cessing, which is a byproduct of the explicit data-fetch from memory to the central execution unit in the compute-centric model. We address this through a Data-Driven Program-ming Model that achieves latency hiding by breaking data access into a series of asynchronous events. By spreading these events across the distributed memory fabric, MCHA al-lows data transmission to be overlapped with local process-ing, significantly reducing the impact of memory-related stalls. Figure 4 shows the programming model for MCHA. To en-able data-driven processing, we categorize architectural op-erations of functions into four primary triggers: 1. Memory Conditional Trigger: Initiates functions when local SRAM variables meet logical predicates, enabling state-dependent data processing. 2. Phase Conditional Trigger: Switches between triggering configurations at synchronization points to facilitate dy-namic function deployment and smooth state transfor-mations. 3. Input Trigger: Activates functions upon message arrival in hardware FIFOs, decoupling execution from NoC la-tency and ensuring data-ready activation. 4. Default Memory Scan: Performs an autonomous scan of local SRAM to trigger execution based on resident data in the absence of external FIFO inputs. This enables the 5Instruction SRAM Data Storage SRAM Output FIFO Input FIFO RISC-V Core   

> Computing Layer: MCC Communication Layer-1 Communication Layer-2

(b) (c) (d) (e) (a) Define Dataflow            

> Program Defined Address Local Decoder MCC MCC MCC MCC Edge I/O Edge I/O Edge I/O Edge I/O DRAM I/O
> DRAM Fabric P2P Interconnect PB PB PB PB PB PB PB PB PB DDR & C2C Interface DDR & C2C Interface DDR & C2C Interface DDR & C2C Interface
> Comm. Layer-3 Inter-Chip Comm. Layer-2 Inter-PB Comm. Layer-1 Intra-PB Comp Layer MCC Data Access Frequency High Low Communication Layer-3 DRAM Fabric
> PB #1 PB #2
> PB #4 PB #3 Fabricated Chip

Figure 3: (a) MCHA Communication “Pyramid”; Architecture of (b) Computing Layer; (c,d,e) Communication Layer-1, -2, & -3. Embedded figure in (e): MCHA die photo for silicon verification. (a )(e) (b) (c) (d)                      

> Ni
> xjRISC-V Core Instruction Memory Type Identify Responder
> Memory Scan i-th RISC-V Core Instruction Memory
> NiDefault Trigger
> 12345678910 11 12 13 14 15 parfor i in [, CoreNum]: if Core[i].MemReq(): #Mem Condition Trigger
> Core[i].MemFunc() elif Core[i].PhaseReq(): #Phase Condition Trigger
> Core[i].PhaseChange() elif Input is not None: #Input Trigger
> Core[i].ProcFunc(Input) elif Core[i].DefaultScan(): #Default Memory Scan
> Core[i].ScanMem() # Do Default Function # FindNeighbour()
> Serialization Cause Severe Stall
> 1
> 234567for iin [, m]: N[i] = FindNeighbor(x[i]) D[i] = GBAccess(N[i]) parfor i in [, m]: y[i] = f(x[i], D[i], p) for iin [, m]: x[i] = y[i]
> Conditional Trigger Enable High Core Utilization Rate
> Data Memory Data Log Phase Log Data Ops Instruction Memory >>Condition Trigger
> Jump MUX PC List Data Memory Ops
> Input Trigger Conventional Pipeline: MCHA Pipeline
> Core A Core B Core A NoC Core B FindNeighbor FindNeighbor FindNeighbor FindNeighbor GB IN GB OUT GB OUT GB IN DRAM I/O DRAM I/O DRAM I/O DRAM I/O Wait Wait Wait Wait Write Back Write Back fffReception Retrieval Retrieval Reception Inter-Core Transmission Sync fSync Sync Sync Write Back Initial Excecution
> MCHA Saving
> W.
> GPU
> MCHA

Figure 4: (a) Compute-centric and data-driven programs; (b) Dataflow for Conditional Trigger and Phase Conditional Trigger; (c) Dataflow for Input Trigger; (d) Dataflow for Default Memory Scan; (e) Pipeline Comparison of Conventional architecture and MCHA. 

MCC to initiate the computing loop without external sig-naling. The corresponding dataflows of these triggers within MCCs are presented in Figure 4(b–d). A more detailed explanation and realization of our design is provided in Section 6.2.2. Furthermore, within this framework, to decouple data index-ing from the processing pipeline, inter-core communication is decomposed into a three-stage asynchronous trigger se-quence: 

⋄ Initial Execution, which triggers the generation and trans-mission of a data index, demonstrated by any trigger; 

⋄ Index Reception, which initiates a local memory search and subsequent message return, demonstrated by the In-put Trigger; 

⋄ Data Retrieval, where the arrival of the indexed data re-sumes the suspended computation, demonstrated by the Input Trigger. By partitioning communication into these discrete asyn-chronous triggers, MCHA effectively masks data transmis-sion latency by overlapping it with the active processing pipeline. Figure 4(e) presents the conceptual dataflow of programs in Figure 4(a). In a conventional pipeline, the centralized GB obstructs the execution flow, leading to severe memory-bound performance degradation. In contrast, by utilizing the Default Memory Scan trigger, MCCs initiate parallel off-chip data loading to maximize DRAM bandwidth utilization through hardware-level concurrency. Computation of the updating function f will be triggered by Memory Conditional Trigger. Detecting the completion of the asynchronous data indexing process and stage transmission of the pipeline is handled through the Phase Conditional Trigger. The im-plementation of the trigger-based data-driven programming model isolates the computing pipeline of each MCC, reduc-ing Tdata −transf er in PSC workloads thanks to the elimina-tion of stalls. 

## 5 Communication Protocols 

The design target of the programming model in Section 4 is to enhance data independence of MCCs for isolation of the local pipeline from being obstructed by others. To realize asynchronous communication for this purpose, we formal-ize the communication protocols of MCHA with the help of MMIO FIFOs embedded in the MCCs instead of relying on a centralized memory controller like NVIDIA Hopper GPU [59]. The direct mapping of the NoC interface into the local ad-dress space of each core eliminates the control-plane dis-tinction between computation and communication, isolat-ing the data access in each MCC from that of others. This design hides communication latency within the execution pipeline, which is particularly advantageous for PSC pat-terns. Furthermore, the multi-tiered communication hierar-chy mitigates bandwidth contention for long-distance trans-fers (e.g., inter-chip and off-chip data access) by isolating local traffic from global data movement. 5.1 Core Message Management In MCHA, each MCC functions as a self-contained execution environment where operations are triggered asynchronously by incoming messages or local memory states, consistent with the principles detailed in Section 4. Workloads are de-ployed to an MCC’s local independent instruction memory with optimized execution flow from compilation. As illus-trated in Figure 5(a), communication FIFOs bypass complex network drivers and are instead mapped directly to the local address space. Consequently, transmitting data to a neigh-6

boring MCC is compiled to a standard memory-store ( store )operation. When the RISC-V core writes to a designated output address, the data is enqueued into the output FIFO. On this other side of receiving, data reception is handled via memory-load ( load ) operations, where the input FIFO functions as the core’s event queue for incoming messages awaiting processing. The implementation of the MMIO FI-FOs masks data transmission latency within the MCC exe-cution pipeline, isolating the MCC local processing from the global NoC data transmission. 5.2 Transmission Message Definition To shield the local MCC pipeline from unexpected stalls in-duced by the multi-tiered NoC latency, we isolate MCC ex-ecution from the global dataflow through a latency-hiding communication framework. This framework stratifies data traffic based on transmission frequency and bandwidth availability, orchestrated by a streamlined 32-bit packet format. By supporting two hardware-optimized message types that match the spatial locality patterns in MCHA (Fig-ure 5(b)), the design effectively minimizes routing overhead while ensuring high flexibility for intertwined PSC execution. Type 1 serves high-throughput, one-hop communication, corresponding to Communication Layer-1. It constitutes the dominant traffic during the Gather phase of Algorithm 1, where MCCs exchange entity states with adjacent PBs or neighbors in the 2D-mesh. Each Type 1 message is a sin-gle self-contained 32-bit packet. The first 3 bits serve as the Type ID and specify the hop direction (North, South, East, West, or Local). The subsequent 5 bits in the same byte de-fine the target (Cores or DRAM), leaving a 3-byte payload for user-defined data. By restricting communication to a single hop, the hardware avoids complex routing headers and multi-cycle state tracking, enabling near-instantaneous data-residency updates. Type 2 supports lower-frequency global communication us-ing variable-length bursts, corresponding to Communica-tion Layer-2 and 3. Each burst comprises a single header fol-lowed by a specified number of data packets. As with Type 1, the initial 3 bits identify the packet type. A dedicated length field (bits 27–28 in Figure 5(b)) specifies the total number of subsequent packets in the burst. The remainder of the header carries the routing information required to traverse the 2D-mesh and reach distant chip-level coordinates. To maximize effective bandwidth, only this initial packet con-tains routing metadata; all following packets are devoted al-most entirely to user-defined content, thereby enabling ef-ficient transmission of weights, environmental parameters, or extended entity histories. The entire transmission process is software-configurable via the RISC-V ISA. This dual-tier protocol ensures that lo-cal neighborhood exchanges are resolved with minimal la-tency, while Type 2 messaging provides the necessary trans-parency for global MCC interactions across a large-scale multi-chip fabric. 5.3 Intra-Block Transmission Multi-core collaboration within the PB triggers intense P2P data sharing, characterized by high-frequency, fine-grained message inquiries. To support this behavior, we deploy the optimized Type 1 transmission format in Section 5.2. To realize stall-free coordination, PBs incorporate a high-bandwidth bidirectional interconnect linking the MCCs, as shown in Figure 5(c), enabling intra-block communication without traversing the global 2D-mesh network. This lo-calized routing effectively unburdens the global mesh and prevents cascaded core stalls. In place of the power-intensive crossbars in general-purpose NoCs, the design employs a FIFO-based queuing and arbitration scheme opti-mized for PSC workloads. At the output stage of each MCC or PB boundary, a hardware message decoder (Figure 5(c)) parses the Type ID and routing metadata of outgoing pack-ets (Section 5.2). This decoder translates high-level mes-sage definitions into physical control signals that drive in-ternal multiplexers: for Type 1 messages, it identifies the single-hop destination port; for Type 2 messages, it locks the path for the duration of a packet burst, ensuring contigu-ous transmission without interleaving jitter. Resource contention arises when multiple MCCs attempt to transmit to the same destination concurrently. Following the first- come-first-served principle inherent to FIFO-based designs [60], each input interface is equipped with a dedi-cated counter. If an incoming message request is not ac-cepted by the target FIFO, its counter increments whenever the target FIFO attempts to fetch messages. During each arbitration cycle, the selector evaluates all active requests and grants priority to the message with the largest counter value—indicating the longest waiting time—pushing it into the input FIFO. Once transmission begins, the correspond-ing counter is reset. This policy serves as a critical anti-starvation mechanism, preventing indefinite delays in state updates. An ablation study comparing the proposed arbitration pol-icy with conventional Round-Robin and random-selection schemes is presented in Figure 5(d). The simulation config-ures 8 input-output FIFO pairs, each with 1,000 packets des-tined for randomly chosen targets. For the evaluated PSC tasks like MARL, long latency tails directly impact sequen-tial processing speed and MCC stalling time; thus, we com-pare the latency at the 99th percentile (P99 latency) across the three policies. With the simulated packet sending rate (x-axis) increase, the P99 latency (y-axis) increases to sat-uration. This demonstrates that the first-come-first-served policy reduces the tail latency by 6.26% to 41.8% depend-ing on packet generation rate, confirming the effectiveness of the selected design. 5.4 Global Neighboring Connection Following the same design philosophy of Section 5.2 and 5.3, we decouple timing constraints across the MCHA 7RISC-V Core Input FIFO Output FIFO Data Storage SRAM FIFO Address Data Address Read Write (a) (c) (d) (b) 28 TYPE ID 000~101 31 Target 3b Payload 24b 29 27 24 25 01        

> Type 1:
> TYPE ID 110~111 31 Length 2b 2928 2726 12 Dest. Addr. 14b Payload 13b Payload 32b Payload 32b Payload 32b 13 0
> Type 2: Header Packet Data Packets
> Input FIFO Output FIFO Message Decoder Waiting Counter Activate Target Counter MUX MAX INDEX Pop Signal
> P99 Latency (10 3Cycles) Packet Sending Rate (# / Cycle) 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 01234567Ours Round Robin Random

Figure 5: (a) MCC Message management method; (b) Message Packet Definition; (c) PB transmission strategy; (d) Ablation study comparing the P99 latency with other routing methods. HST_S Request HST_R Acknowledge Receiver HST_R HSR_R Sender HST_S HSR_S (a) (b) Time Time Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 Start End HST_S HST_R 

Figure 6: (a) Port definition for 1 internal connector pair (b) Timing diagram of the connectors in (a) 

with an asynchronous network between neighboring PBs to achieve independent, self-governing execution. This allows each PB to operate within its own independent clock do-main, reducing global clock distribution complexity and mit-igating peak power surges. As shown in Fig. 6, inter-block data transfers (e.g., Block A to Block B) are governed by a robust 4-phase asynchronous handshake protocol: Phase 1. Request: The protocol begins with Block A driving its handshake sending port (HST_S) high to signal a request. Phase 2. Acknowledgement: Upon detecting this request, Block B responds by driving its acknowledgement port (HST_R /HSR_S) high. Phase 3. Clear Request: Block A then clears its request sig-nal and reset HST_S to “0”. Phase 4. Clear Acknowledgement: After which Block B clears its acknowledgement, completing the cycle and freeing the channel for the next transfer. This lightweight handshake acts as a hardware-level flow control, ensuring data residency and integrity across the mesh even when neighboring blocks operate at different fre-quencies or states. When scaling to multi-chip systems, MCHA extends its 2D-mesh communication protocol across chip boundaries using high-bandwidth interconnects such as PCIe [57] or UCIe [58]. These system-level links maintain information transparency, enabling a distant core on a remote chip to be accessed via the same asynchronous handshake strat-egy. Consequently, MCHA provides a modular and scalable fabric capable of supporting PSC across multiple chips. 

## 6 System Deployment and Mapping Strategy 

This section elaborates how to maximize the communica-tion efficiency of the multi-tiered NoC and the parallelism of MCCs through the formulation of algorithms along with their deployment strategies on the MCHA platform. Figure 7(a– b) illustrates the programming and deployment workflow of MCHA with a representative program example, matrix pro-cessing A · (prod (B)) − C, where prod () computes the prod-uct of all numerical elements in a matrix. 6.1 Collective Usage of MCC Buffers Since MCHA enables high independence to the MCCs, the management of the on-chip memory and workload varies from the conventional systems. Instead of allocating spe-cific tasks to different cores, MCHA maps computational entities to cores based on the memory footprint of their state data (x ni in Algorithm 1). Only cores that control this data can modify it; others can either read the data or send write requests to these cores. Compared with threads in a GPU that are assigned to specific operations each time (Figure 7(c–d)), cores in MCHA perform different operations based on memory types to parallelize the irregular data ac-cess, namely Tdata −transf er in PSC workloads. As pre-sented in Figure 7(a), Core 0 and 2 are responsible for loading the data of matrices A and C, acting as the entity buffer. When the state data size surpasses the capacity of on-chip SRAM, only the necessary indices for accessing off-chip DRAM are maintained in SRAM, as Core 0 index-ing data of vector A in Phase 1. By organizing these index structures in alignment with the underlying hardware topol-ogy (e.g., arrange the elements of A and C alternately in the DRAM), we convert the serialized and irregular mem-ory access characteristics of traditional paradigms into pre-dictable, parallelized local transactions. Consequently, the most frequently accessed variables remain physically co-located with the corresponding processing logic, thereby eliminating the “memory wall” at the architectural level. 6.1.1 Locality-Aware Entity Clustering To filter local data transfers through the multi-tiered NoC, thereby minimizing communication overhead in the 2D-mesh, the mapping process prioritizes computational local-ity by assigning neighboring entities to the same MCC or ad-jacent cores within a PB based on their interaction frequency. For PSC workloads, we can use clustering [61] or graph-partitioning [62] algorithms to group entities with overlap-ping neighbor sets ( Ni in Algorithm 1), thus maximizing data reuse within local SRAM banks. In the provided example, this process is represented as placing the three cores within the same PB. As the neighbor sets Ni evolve during task execution, e.g., due to agent movement necessitating inter-core communication, MCHA supports periodic entity migra-tion, with frequency and strategy tailored to the task. In complex environments such as Multi-Agent Particle Environ-8

ments (MPE) [63, 64] or StarCraft maps [49], the MARL sim-ulation space is initially partitioned into blocks (Figure 7(e)). Throughout sequential steps in PSC patterns, these block boundaries are dynamically adjusted based on local agent density, rebalancing computational load and ensuring con-sistent architecture-wide performance. 6.1.2 Systolic Mapping for Complicated Update Functions When processing computationally intensive update functions f , such as deep neural network inference, 

Tdata −transf er is embedded in the data sharing between collaborating MCCs. Workloads requiring frequent com-munication, for example, the lookup-table of non-linear functions and corresponding input generatos, are imple-mented within the same blocks. Others are spread across the system according to the dataflow structure, formulating a systolic array. For example, in Figure 7(a–b), Core 1 acts as the buffer of intermediate results for computing A · (prod (B)) . Applying an input-stationary systolic map-ping [65], these cores first store the input data (A in this example) and then, triggered by the completion of input transmission, network weights (B in this example) are streamed through these MCCs while previously prepared input data remain stationary in local SRAM. By sequencing weights according to input channels, the architecture can skip null-value operations and support sparsity-aware computation. In detail, MCHA MCCs demonstrate this process through 2 continuous phases, one for temporal buffering (Phase 1 of Core 1), the other for data indexing and computing (Phase 2 of Core 1). The completion of the input transmission acts as the Phase Change Trigger of Phase 1, changing the core to the computing phase, where data indexing of B is default. The core then performs operations according to pre-defined instructions (prod 

in this example, multiply-and-accumulate for neural net-works), triggered by the arrival of indexed data. Figure 7(f) illustrates the systolic mapping of a 2-layer Neural Network (NN) in MCHA. The blue cores (labeled as NN-L1) store the data generated in the Parameter Gather process, namely the input data of the first NN layer, acting as intermediate buffers (a similar role as Core 1 in Figure 7(b)). This spatial unrolling prevents computationally dense transformation phases from becoming bottlenecks, thereby maintaining the efficiency of the data-driven computing flow. 6.2 Data-Driven Programming Model Implementation by RISC-V ISA The reconfigurability of MCHA is demonstrated through the programmable triggering logic based on standard RISC-V in-struction set (RV32I as an example). The ISA execution of each MCC is governed by the state of the FIFOs and local SRAM conditions through 4 different triggers in the program-ming model at each stage. (e) (c) (a) (d) (b) Inital Partition                                                                                        

> t Steps
> Border Migration (f)
> MCC
> PB
> Gather & Update NN-L1 NN-L2
> Systolic Flow
> cudaMemcpy (DRAM, B)
> vecProd <<< 1,3>>> (B,D)
> cudaMemcpy (DRAM, [A,C])
> vecScalProd <<< 1,3>>> (D, A,E)
> vecMinus <<< 1,3>>> (E,C,F)
> cudaMemcpy (F, DRAM) In =ReadFIFO ()
> Phase 1:
> if MemSize () == 3:
> goto Phase 2 #Comp
> elif In is None :
> WriteFIFO (A_addr, DRAM)
> else :
> WriteMem (In) #Memory
> Phase 2:
> if HandShake ():
> WriteFIFO (A, Core1)
> goto Phase 3 #Halt
> elif In is not None :
> RecvHandShake (In)
> Phase 1:
> if MemSize () == 3:
> goto Phase 2 #Comp
> elif In is not None :
> WriteMem (In) #Buffer
> Phase 2:
> if Count == 3:
> WriteFIFO (Shake, Core0)
> goto Phase 1 #Cycle
> elif In is not None :
> WriteMem (P* In, Core2) Count += 1
> else :
> WriteFIFO (B_addr, DRAM) ...
> Phase 2:
> ...
> if In is not None :
> WriteFIFO (In -C,DRAM) Count += 1
> B1B2
> DB3
> A1A2
> A3
> P1P2
> P3
> C1C2
> C3
> B1B2
> DB3
> B1B2
> DB3
> A1-3
> B1-3
> A1C1
> DE1
> A2C2
> DE2
> A3C3
> DE3
> A1C1
> F1E3
> A2C2
> F2E3
> A3C3
> F3E3
> E1-3 F1-3
> Core 0 Thread 0 Cache Line Thread 1 Thread 2 Core 1 Core 2
> Core 0 Core 1 Core 2
> MCHA MCHA GPU GPU
> B1
> B2
> B3
> B1
> B2
> B3
> A1
> A2
> A3
> C1
> C2
> C3
> B1
> B2
> B3
> A1
> A2
> A3
> C1
> C2
> C3

Figure 7: (a) A program for MCHA; (b) Conceptual dataflow of (a); (c) Program using CUDA; (d) Conceptual dataflow of (c); (e) In-process update enabled by 2D-mesh; (f) On-chip systolic function demonstration; 

6.2.1 MMIO-Based FIFO Interaction By leveraging the MMIO FIFOs described in Section 5.1, sending and receiving data in MCCs reduces to standard RISC-V LW (Load Word) and SW (Store Word) instructions. This decouples communication from computation, allow-ing each MCC’s processing pipeline to remain uninterrupted and transmission latency to be effectively hidden. (a) When a compiled SW instruction targets the output FIFO address (WriteFIFO ), the hardware pushes the 32-bit payload into the transmission queue. To prevent data loss, if the FIFO is full, the hardware interface stalls the pipeline or main-tains the value in the register file until a slot becomes avail-able, similar to the behavior of memory handshake in con-ventional SW operations. Crucially, the ISAs ensure atomic transmission; once a multi-packet message (Type 2) begins, the hardware locks the port to ensure the packets are trans-mitted contiguously without interleaving jitter. (b) An LW in-struction targeting the input FIFO ( ReadFIFO ) pops the front-most 32-bit packet. To enable high-speed triggering, the hardware utilizes a zero-signature mechanism: if the FIFO is empty, the LW returns a 32-bit “0”, which triggers the De-fault Memory Scan if it exists. Conversely, if a valid packet is present, the protocol guarantees that at least one bit is non-zero (bit 28 for Type 1 or bit 31 for Type 2, as shown in Figure 5(b)). 6.2.2 Control Flow Instruction Mapping As presented in Figure 7(a), each time MCC is idle, it will read the address corresponding to the input FIFO if Input Trigger is not empty and check all the other triggers. Thus, the basic structure of the program at each phase is a loop, which repeats the data detection process until jumping into other phases. The 4 triggering conditions are accomplished by RISC-V branching instructions, as demonstrated by the 9Table 1: Design Parameters for Large-Scale Simulation 

Part Parameter Value MCC Memory Size (KB) 1Pipeline Parallelism 1FIFO Buffer 8Processing Throughput (GFLOPS/Core) 1.6 PB Edge Connector 4DRAM Connector 1Number of Cores 4Connector Bandwidth (GB/s) 1024 MCHA External Connector 4DRAM Access Parallelism 16 Number of Blocks 16 External Connector Bandwidth (GB/s) 64 DRAM Access Bandwidth (GB/s) 409.6 if statement in Figure 7(a), allowing the core to react to the memory fabric in real-time. (a) Memory & Phase Conditional Triggers: These two kinds of triggers rely on reconfigurable data statistics stored at pre-programmed addresses within the local SRAM. By periodically reading these status vari-ables, the RISC-V branch logic determines if the core should handle special operations or switch functional phases. (b) Input Trigger: By executing an LW from the input FIFO fol-lowed by a conditional branch, such as BNE , the core can immediately detect incoming data. If the result is non-zero, the Program Counter (PC) jumps to the corresponding pro-cessing function. (c) Default Memory Scan: If an LW from the input FIFO returns zero (empty FIFO), the core can de-fault to a memory scan. This is managed via a scan pointer maintained in the register file, which incrementally traverses the local SRAM to check for a response. Ultimately, every functional trigger in the MCHA model is represented as a PC jump to a specialized firmware routine. By mapping the pro-gramming model components into existing RISC-V instruc-tions, MCHA introduces minimal efforts for ISA construc-tion. 6.3 Dataflow-Defined Workload Assignment To maximize MCHA throughput, the assignment of the work-loads should involve identifying essential reactive elements and mathematically modeling throughput requirements to determine the optimal pipeline depth for the target comput-ing tasks. 6.3.1 Functional Requirements for Data-Driven Programs Similar to object-oriented programming, the MCHA requires programmers to break the target algorithm into multiple stat-ically defined phases. The 4 types of triggers of a specific phase act as the member functions of an object. The pro-grammer should define Phase Conditional Trigger, which serves as the termination condition for a computational loop, analogous to loop-exit logic in conventional paradigms. Fur-thermore, each phase must include at least one definition of an Input Trigger or a Default Memory Scan to dictate the specific operations dominating that phase ( WriteFIFO and 

WriteMem in Figure 7(a) for Core 0). If neither is defined, the MCC becomes a “zombie” core, because it lacks both ex-ternal stimulus responses and autonomous self-activation. The transmission from the conventional programs to MCHA ones can be accomplished with the help of Large Language Models (LLMs). We provide an example that transforms a neural network to MCHA programs in C++ with the help of Deepseek-R1 [66] in thinking mode in our github ( https: //github.com/carabdis/MCHA/LLM.md ). The program must explicitly include handshake signal gen-eration to manage the flow of data across the pipeline, en-suring that residency is maintained without causing mesh-wide stalls. As presented in Figure 7(a), Phase 2 of Core 0 and 1, the explicit handshake acts as the data barrier for the serialized part in PSC workloads. 6.3.2 Analytical Deployment and Throughput Matching After decoupling the PSC workloads into serialized phases, the deployment of the algorithm can be defined as a flow matching problem. We provide a 3-step analytical process to deploy a program onto MCHA fabric to balance the work-load across the system. Step-1 Throughput Extraction: The processing characteris-tics of MCC can be described through two critical metrics, consumption rate Rpop i and production rate Rpush i . Rpop is defined as the average cycles required for a core to pop and parse a 32-bit input packet from the input FIFO. Rpush is defined as the average cycles required for the core to com-pute the assigned workload and push the resulting packet to the output FIFO. Thus, the goal is to match the ingress and egress rates of each stage in the pipeline. For example, ne-glecting the DRAM access latency, Core 0 in Figure 7(a) gen-erates 1 output packet per cycle in Phase 2, namely Rpush  

> 0

=1. Core 1 consumes the 1 input packet from Core 0 every 3 cycles to compute the intermediate results of A · (prod (B)) ,thus Rpop  

> 1

= 1/3 .Step-2 Ideal Pipeline Derivation: Under the assumption of in-finite hardware resources, the ideal parallelized core count for each phase ( N ideal i ) required to achieve a non-blocking pipeline without hardware waste is derived from the ratio of these rates. To maintain a steady state where FIFOs nei-ther overflow nor starve, the flow balance between serialized phases is defined as:          

> Nideal i∗Rpush i=Nideal i−1∗Rpop i(4)

In our example, since Rpush  

> 0

= 1 and Rpop  

> 1

= 1/3 , the ideal ratio N ideal  

> 0

: N ideal  

> 1

is 1 : 3 . This ratio determines the quan-titative relationship between MCCs operating in neighboring phases, minimizing unnecessary data movement of interme-10 Table 2: The power and area breakdown of MCHA 

Part Component Area (mm 2)Area (%) Power (mW) Power (%) MCC SRAM 0.0303 82.78 0.4968 41.40 FIFO 0.0006 1.64 0.0706 5.88 RISC-V Core 0.0044 12.02 0.4913 40.94 Control 0.0013 3.55 0.1412 11.78 Total (MCC) 0.0366 - 1.2000 -PB MCC 0.1464 94.57 4.8000 76.78 Control 0.0084 5.42 1.4514 23.21 Total (PB) 0.1548 - 6.2514 -MCHA PB 2.4768 84.80 100.0224 86.70 Ext. Connector 0.0560 1.92 1.9352 1.68 Int. Connector 0.3878 13.28 13.401811.62 Total 2.9206 - 115.3594 -diate results. Step-3 Realistic Constraint Scaling: Given a fixed physical scale, the deployment logic determines the maximum num-ber of concurrently active phases M max para . Due to memory structural hazards—where buffering and computation can-not occupy the same SRAM bank simultaneously—parallel phases must be interleaved with idle or buffering phases or employ twice the memory capacity via ping-pong buffering. The algorithm computes M max para ≥ 1 based on the minimum buffer cores required per phase. In the former example, if phases require {1, 2, 1} memory cores for Mpara = 2 , but only 3 cores are available, then M max para = 1 . Starting from 

M max para , the system iteratively reduces the number of active phases until memory capacity constraints are satisfied. This scaling ensures robustness across implementations, from single-chip edge devices to large-scale multi-chip fabrics. 

## 7 Evaluation 

7.1 Experimental Setup To evaluate the performance and efficiency of large-scale MCHA architecture, we developed a cycle-accurate simula-tor. This simulator is directly extracted from RTL Verilog HDL implementation, including MCCs, PBs, on-chip 2D-mesh de-sign, and the chip-wise connectors. The chip-wise connec-tors demonstrated in the Verilog code are SPI connectors as a research prototype, which are replaced by parameters of commercial PCIe 4.0 in the simulator. Other hardware pa-rameters are modeled based on logic synthesis results us-ing TSMC 28nm PDK at 200MHz. Detailed parameters of one MCHA chip using in the simulator are in Table 1. The corresponding area and power overhead of our implemen-tation are given in Table 2. To verify MCHA, we compare the performance of the MCHA system composed of 4 (MCHA-4) and 32 (MCHA-32) chips to various kinds of DSAs and generalized GPUs. NVIDIA A100 GPU is used as the baseline for massive-scale par-allel workloads with flexibility. PEARL [67], ActiveN [68], MC 2A [69], Dalorex [70], and PolyGraph [19] are chosen as the specialized accelerators for different benchmarks. The evaluation covers three distinct domains, highlighting MCHA’s ability to handle various types of programs: (1) MARL: a comprehensive suite including MPE Simple Spread [63], StarCraft II (SMAX) [49], Switch Riddle [50], and STORM [51, 52]. Performance is compared against JAX-MARL [49] running on A100 or RTX 3090 and PEARL [67]. For each environment, we measure the average processing speed of the baselines computing 1,000 timesteps. The number of agents existing in these environments is fixed as 1,000, to manifest the ef-ficiency in large-scale MARL computation. To ensure a fair comparison, the MCHA implementation utilizes the same hyperparameters as the JAX-MARL demon-strations, including neighborhood size Ni, action space, and update functions fi.(2) Large-Scale Neuromorphic Computing: The bench-mark is a 2% MVC (Motor Variable Control) nervous sys-tem model [71], which follows the setup established by ActiveN [68], testing the architecture’s capability to han-dle sparse, high-frequency spikes and deterministic tim-ing. (3) Typical BSP for Graph Processing: We evaluate MCHA ’s performance on regular data access patterns using PageRank [72], BFS [73], and Markov Random Field (MRF) image segmentation [74], compared with exist-ing DSAs (MC 2A [69], PolyGraph [19], and Dalorex [70]) and GPUs [19, 69, 75, 76]. The evaluation uses the 

orkut graph [77] when comparing PageRank and BFS against PolyGraph [19], and the RMAT-26 graph [78] when comparing against Dalorex [70]. MRF image seg-mentation input data follows [74]. For the above workloads, MCHA matches the algorithmic setup of every corresponding baseline [19, 49, 68–70] in numerical precision, task size, step definition, and conver-gence condition. 7.2 End-to-End Computing Throughput 7.2.1 Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) Figure 8(a) compares the absolute execution time (y-axis) of different hardware (x-axis), including MCHA (M1, M2), GPUs (G1–G2), and FPGA (F1). The presented throughput time is measured end-to-end including data off-loading and data processing. MCHA-4 delivers 153.06 × to 2456.96 ×

speedups versus GPU-accelerated frameworks. MCHA-32 further achieves 1.22 ∼4.25 × speedup over MCHA-4. This performance leap stems from the elimination of redundant global memory copies due to frequent cache coherence and overfetch in GPUs. Furthermore, the high data locality 11 

achieved in MCHA in turn removes most of the irregular data access to DRAM, thus improving the overall performance. Compared to PEARL (F1), MCHA-4 achieves a speedup of 2.28 × to 4.78 ×. This performance gain is primarily at-tributed to the data-driven adaptivity inherent to the MCHA architecture, which masks data transmission latency across the multi-tiered NoC. Furthermore, MCHA-4 eliminates the significant communication overhead typically associated with data transfers between external GPUs and the FPGA fab-ric, streamlining the execution of PSC workloads. 7.2.2 Large-Scale Neuromorphic Computing Figure 8(c) shows the comparison results benchmarking MCHA (M1, M2), neuromorphic accelerators (AN, NE, Loihi) [2, 68, 79] and GPUs (G1, G2, G4). MCHA-4 shows 5.36 × improvement over the neuromorphic-specific accel-erators [2, 68], completing a single task in 0.7842s, while the MCHA-32 presents 39.996 × speedup. When compared with ActiveN, MCHA-32 performs 1.175 × speedup with 9.36% power consumption, presenting the high efficiency of MCHA originating from the data-driven nature. Further-more, the near-linear performance improvement between MCHA-4 and MCHA-32 originates from the high spatial lo-cality achieved by the communication strategy (more details are investigated in Section 7.3.3). 7.2.3 Typical BSP for Graph Processing Figure 8(a), (b)&(d) presents the results. MCHA presents comparable results versus various DSAs for these applica-tions. Compared with general-purpose GPUs for BSP tasks, MCHA-32 achieves 86.69 ×, 3.93 ×, and 4.56 × speedup, re-spectively, while MCHA-4 also presents comparable perfor-mance. We further compare MCHA with Dalorex[70], whose 256 cores match the compute-unit count of MCHA-4 (“M2” in Figure8). M1L and M2L denote M1 (MCHA-32) and M2 (MCHA-4) with on-chip memory scaled to 4.2,MB/core to match Dalorex’s configuration, respectively. In their origi-nal setup (M1 and M2), MCHA shows little advantage over Dalorex; however, M1L achieves a 5.66 ∼7.28 × throughput improvement, and M2L reaches throughput comparable to Dalorex. This gap is explained by DRAM access overhead: Dalorex’s model excludes DRAM latency, whereas MCHA’s includes it. On the RMAT-26 [78] dataset, DRAM accesses consume 81.42% of M1’s execution time under the original 1KB/core configuration — an overhead largely eliminated by the enlarged on-chip memory in M1L. The lower speedup of BSP implementations relative to MARL and MVC stems from differences in arithmetic intensity across the workloads. The most informative metric is the bandwidth utilization rate. In the BSP-MRF task, the per-formance ratio between MCHA-4 and the GPU (0.61) is close to the ratio of their respective DRAM bandwidths (0.67). This correlation proves that MCHA-4 maintains 

Table 3: The memory footprint of MCHA-4 

Benchmark Core Memory Ops (MB) Intra-Block (MB) Inter-Block (MB) Inter-Chip (MB) DRAM Ac-cess (MB) MPE Simple Spread 211.900 146.152 67.318 0.000 0.092 Switch Riddle 102.355 64.161 30.685 0.000 0.035 Starcraft 1044.362 461.526 141.667 0.854 0.139 STORM 158.167 107.375 40.645 4.378 0.077 10 110 210 310 410 5Steps / s (a) (c) Speed Up 10 010 110 2                                 

> M1
> 113.6 AN 96.6 NE 12.2 Loihi 2.8 G2 1G1 0.78 G4 0.29
> M2
> 15.2 MARL BSP GTEPS 10 110 210 0
> M1 M2
> F1 G1 G2
> M1 M2
> F1 G1 G2
> M1 M2
> F1 G1 G2 (d) 10 -1 10 010 1Speed Up
> M1
> 4.56
> M2
> 0.61 MC  2 A1.17 G3 1AIA 0.20 PGMA 0.13 XC 0.06
> M1 M2
> F1 G1 G2
> M1 M2
> P1 G1 G2
> M1 M2
> P1 G1 G2 MPE Simple Spread Switch Riddle Starcraft STORM PageRank BFS
> M1 :MCHA-32 ,M2 :MCHA-4 , M1L: MCHA-32 w/ more SRAM, M2L: MCHA-4 w/ more SRAM, F1: FPGA-Gym, P1: PolyGraph, AN: ActiveN, NE: Neuro Engine, G1: A100, G2: RTX3090, G3: RTX 2090 Super, G4: TitanX, XC: Xeon CPU, DA: Dalorex, T: Tesseract, MO1: MCHA w/o asynchronous communication, MO2: MCHA w/o mulit-tiered NoC, MO3: MCHA w/o data-driven model, MO4: MCHA w/o 2D-Mesh, PR: PageRank, SM:SMAX
> 10 010 210 4(e) Speed Up
> M1 MO1 MO2 MO3 G1 MO4 G3 MRF MVC PR SM MRF MVC PR SM MRF MVC PR SM MRF MVC PR SM MRF MVC PR SM MRF MVC PR SM Baseline Contribution Percentage (%) (f) 20 40 60 80 SMAX 30.2 25.6 35.5 PR 39.4 18.9 29.5 MVC 36.5 20.2 31.9 MRF 35.1 26.0 36.3 MO1 MO2 MO3 MO4 M1L
> M1
> M2L
> M2
> DA TM1L
> M1
> M2L
> M2
> DA T10 110 210 0(b) GTEPS PageRank BFS

Figure 8: The speedup compared with the existing (a) MARL and BSP; (b) more BSP; (c) MVC; (d) BSP-MRF accelerators. (e) The ablation study of MCHA-4. (f) The detailed contribution of differ-ent characteristics of MCHA. 

a near-optimal bandwidth utilization rate in regular data processing tasks, while also presenting the drawbacks of MCHA on computing-intensive tasks because of the limited scale. Figure 8(e) and (f) present an ablation study of MCHA-32, starting from a bus-based architecture and incrementally adding one feature at a time until reaching the full MCHA de-sign. Each feature’s contribution is quantified by the latency reduction it yields over the bus-based baseline on a given workload. The results show that the bulk of the speedup over GPUs stems from the multi-tiered NoC and the data-driven model proposed by MCHA, with the asynchronous commu-nication strategy providing additional gains. This break-down confirms the effectiveness of MCHA’s core tenets, i.e., data localization and data-driven programming. 7.3 Architectural Analysis To elucidate the fundamental reasons for the observed MCHA performance gains, we explore the architectural de-sign space and profile the benchmark. We first examine the simulation results of the end-to-end throughput measure-12 

ment and find the components of the processing time of MCHA-4. We also provide the memory footprint of MCHA-4 on MARL workloads. Based on these analyses, we for-mulate a customized roofline model, establishing the op-erational upper bounds for MCHA. Utilizing this model, we examine the scalability characteristics of MCHA to identify the structural features that enable near-linear performance growth across increasing core counts and the variation of speedup factor between MCHA-4 and MCHA-32 in different cases. Further, we conduct a sensitivity analysis, quanti-fying how variations in multi-level interconnect bandwidths and RISC-V compute intensity, as detailed in Table 1, impact the end-to-end throughput of PSC applications. 7.3.1 Computing Intensity Analysis Figure 9 shows the results of profiling runtime operational types for MCHA-4. The x-axis is the execution time. The y-axis shows the operational intensity in percentage: “com-pute” for computation, “memory” for memory I/O access op-erations, “Comm.” for the three types of NoC operations. A key insight from this breakdown is that these workloads are overwhelmingly communication-dominant. Intra-block and inter-block data movements constitute 57.3% ∼69.1% of operational cycles, which underscores why conventional GPUs struggle with PSC tasks with the detailed memory foot-prints of MCHA in Table 3. Lacking an efficient P2P fabric for inter-core data exchange, GPUs force high-frequency trans-missions through the global memory hierarchy. This can be illustrated by profiling the MPE Simple Spread benchmark on an RTX3090 with Nsight Systems. The essential data per agent amounts to 8 bytes, comprising the weight vec-tor (hidden dimension 64) and the environment state. As shown in Figure9(a), the total off-chip memory traffic of the RTX 3090 running MPE Simple Spread with 1,000 agents over 1,000 steps is 14.88 × larger than that of MCHA-4, a disparity driven by cache-coherence traffic across L2 cache lines. The reason MCHA-4’s data access still exceeds the ap-plication’s essential working set is the four-fold replication of the neural network, stored once per chip. Nevertheless, MCHA-4’s multi-tiered NoC preserves data locality and by-passes off-chip memory and the global buffer. Compared to the GPU computing intensity in Figure 1(d) in Section 1, where DRAM access accounts for 78.9% of the total opera-tions, DRAM traffic in MCHA occupies only 2.26% ∼5.44%. This significant reduction validates that MCHA successfully transforms global memory bottlenecks into localized on-chip data traffic. To further demonstrate the efficacy of the MCHA architec-ture, we compare the throughput of MCHA-32, MCHA-4, and an NVIDIA A100 on MARL workloads after factoring out GPU software framework overhead. Even after this nor-malization, MCHA-32 still achieves 4.01 ∼21.93 × speedup. This overhead originates predominantly from XLA [80] just-in-time compilation, which, though intended to optimize 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 Intensity (10 -3 %) Active Cumulative Time (ms) (c)                          

> Memory Compute Inter-Block Comm. Inter-Chip Comm. Intra-Block Comm. Intensity (10 -3 %) (e) Active Cumulative Time (ms)
> 0.0 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
> 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 Intensity (10 -3 %) Active Cumulative Time (ms) (d)
> 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 Active Cumulative Time (ms) Intensity (10 -3 %) (f) MCHA-4 94.8 KB RTX 3090 1410.6KB (a) Throughput (Steps/s) MPE Simple Spread Switch Riddle Starcraft STORM 10 -1 10 110 310 510 7
> M1 M2
> GO1 G1
> M1 M2
> GO1 G1
> M1 M2
> GO1 G1
> M1 M2
> GO1 G1
> GO1: GPU exclude software framework (b) Essential Data 29.6KB Extra Data 97.9% 68.8%

Figure 9: (a) The total data movement of MCHA-4 and RTX3090. (b) The throughput of MCHA-32, MCHA-4 and A100 GPU with and without the software framework time costs. The computing inten-sity of (c) MPE Simple Spread, (d) Switch Riddle, (e) Starcraft, and (f) STORM of MCHA. 10 -2 10 -1 10 010 110 210 310 410 -1 10 -0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4Arithmetic Density (FLOP/Byte) Throughput (GFLOPS)   

> A100 MCHA-4 Peak Throughput Intra-Block Comm. Inter-Block Comm. DRAM Access Inter-Chip Comm. MPE Simple Spread Starcraft Switch Riddle STORM

Figure 10: Roofline model analysis for MCHA-4 and A100. 10 310 4Throughput (Steps / s) 10 20 40 80 160 320 640 1280 2560 5120 10240 Number of Agents (a) (b) MCHA-16 MCHA-32 MCHA-4 MCHA-8 10 310 4Throughput (Steps / s) 10 20 40 80 160 320 640 1280 2560 5120 10240 20480 40960 81920 Number of Neurons 

Figure 11: The scale-up effect of (a) SMAX (b) MVC. 

memory-bound workloads, consumes 97.5% ∼99.79% of total GPU execution time. Such a stark imbalance under-scores the advantage of the proposed data-driven program-ming model: it statically determines the instruction sched-ule from the base algorithm while sustaining high hardware utilization. The overlap of computation and data movement further validates the model’s ability to hide transmission la-tency within the pipeline. 7.3.2 Roofline Model Analysis Figure 10 shows the roofline models for MCHA-4 and A100. Unlike conventional GPUs, which are typically bounded by a single global memory bandwidth (as shown in Figure 1(a)), MCHA exhibits a tiered execution profile characterized by 4 bandwidth limits. While the hierarchy of these bandwidth limits is fixed by the hardware design, the actual through-put bottleneck is dynamically determined by its specific al-gorithmic dataflow. For example, STORM and Switch Rid-13 

dle workloads are constrained by the Intra-Block Commu-nication bandwidth. Though the limitation is slight, this suggests that their high-frequency agent interactions sat-urate the local communication bandwidth before reaching the MCC’s compute limits. The remaining workloads are limited by the MCC computing throughput, operating within the bandwidth headroom provided by MCHA-4. This diver-gence emphasizes the key role of the memory-centric na-ture of the proposed data-driven programming principles. By strategically organizing tasks to maximize data residency, MCHA minimizes high-latency transmissions and shifts the operational point toward the compute-bound region for higher throughput. 7.3.3 Scaling-Up Effect The architectural scalability of MCHA is fundamentally driven by its high spatial and temporal locality. Workloads with spatially organized neighborhood definitions, such as large-scale maps containing thousands of agents, are parti-tioned using a dynamic border strategy, as illustrated in Fig-ure 7(e). This allows the workload to be distributed across MCCs while maintaining data residency. Conversely, for graph-based neighborhood topologies, a min-cut partition-ing algorithm can be implemented to decompose the global graph into localized sub-graphs. In this configuration, inter-sub-graph edge data is temporarily buffered in DRAM, en-suring that the high-frequency internal processing remains localized within the on-chip mesh. Figure 11 presents the scaling-up characteristics of the MCHA hardware across varying workload sizes and hardware scales, using SMAX and MVC as the benchmark. The persistent parameters and corresponding entities are spread evenly on the hardware for specific comparison. Figure 11(a) shows that at small agent counts (10 to 40 agents in SMAX), the system throughput remains relatively constant. This phenomenon occurs because the primary overhead of the execution at this time is not the compute in-tensity or communication volume, but the pipeline latency required to complete the initial dataflow sequence. As the agent population grows, the dominant bottleneck shifts from pipeline latency to compute and transmission through-put. In this regime, the processing time increases propor-tionally with the number of agents. Additionally, Figure 11(a) also shows that the accelerating rates of MCHA-32 com-pared with MCHA-4 vary when the benchmark scale is dif-ferent. This is because the even distribution of the agents in the hardware leads to performance limits originating from the Inter-Chip Communication. Similar trends can be ob-served from Figure 11(b) for the MVC benchmark. Compar-ing Figure 11(a) with (b), for 2% MVC benchmark, MCHA-32 achieves 7.47 × speedup compared with MCHA-4, while this ratio decreases to 3.85 × for SMAX, including 10240 agents. The reason for this phenomenon is that the arithmetic den-sity of SMAX is higher than that of the MVC with a reinforce-MCC Throughput Intra-Block Bandwidth Inter-Block Bandwidth global DRAM Bandwidth Inter-Chip Bandwidth Computing Latency Throughput (GFLOPS) 10 410 310 210 110 010 -2 10 -1 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4(a) Arithmetic Density (FLOP/Byte) Changing Direction 020 40 60 80 Latency (10 3 Cycles / Step) 6.4 12.8 25.6 51.2 102.4                                                                                            

> Lower is Better
> (b) MCC Throughput (GFLOPS) Changing Direction (c) Throughput (GFLOPS) 10 -2 10 -1 10 010 110 210 310 4Arithmetic Density (FLOP/Byte) Changing Direction 10 410 310 210 110 00100 200 300 400 500 600 Latency (10 3Cycles / Step) Intra-Block Bandwidth (GB/s) 2304 576 144 36 9(d) Changing Direction
> Lower is Better
> 0100 200 300 400 500 600 (f) Inter-Block Bandwidth(GB/s) Latency (10 3Cycles / Step) 1024 256 64 16 4Changing Direction
> Lower is Better
> (e) Changing Direction 10 -2 10 -1 10 010 110 210 310 4Arithmetic Density (FLOP/Byte) Throughput (GFLOPS) 10 410 310 210 110 00100 200 300 400 500 600 (h) Inter-Chip Bandwidth (GB/s) 64 32 16 84Latency (10 3Cycles / Step)
> Lower is Better
> Changing Direction (g) 10 -2 10 -1 10 010 110 210 310 4Arithmetic Density (FLOP/Byte) Changing Direction Throughput (GFLOPS) 10 410 310 210 110 0(j) global DRAM Bandwidth (GB/s) 409.6102.4 25.6 6.4 1.6 0100 200 300 400 500 600 Latency (10 3Cycles / Step)
> Lower is Better
> Changing Direction (i) Changing Direction 10 -2 10 -1 10 010 110 210 310 4Arithmetic Density (FLOP/Byte) Throughput (GFLOPS) 10 410 310 210 110 0

Figure 12: The roofline model and throughput comparison based on different (a–b) MCC throughput; (c–d) Intra-block bandwidth; (e–f) Inter-block bandwidth; (g–h) Inter-chip bandwidth; (i–j) global DRAM bandwidth. 

ment neural network included as the updating function. 7.3.4 Design Space Exploration According to the roofline model presented in Section 4, the design space of MCHA can be described by multiple band-widths and computing limits. Figure 12 shows the influence of varying parameters in MCHA-4 on the roofline models. The varying design parameters cover MCC throughput (a– b) and the bandwidths of Intra-block (c–d), Inter-block (e– f), Inter-chip (g–h), and global DRAM (i–j). Inter-chip band-width and global DRAM bandwidth have the largest impact on the overall effective throughput. This phenomenon can be observed through the slight growth of the processing time before arriving at the turning point of the roofline model, as the decrease of inter-chip bandwidth and global DRAM bandwidth. This indicates that the communication between different chips or off-chip memory should be controlled in this MCHA architecture, which is straightforward for our de-sign. In other cases, the influence of the parameters on the final throughput is similar to the conventional roofline model. 14 

7.4 Related Works MCHA vs. Compute-Centric Architectures and Frameworks. While many-core CPUs and GPUs are the current main-stream hardware solution executing PSC tasks, they are doomed to hit the “memory wall” [20–22]. Software frame-works like JAX-MARL [49] attempt to alleviate this through JIT-compiled kernel fusion, yet they are still throttled by rigid hardware cache hierarchies. For MARL workloads, this leads to massive cache coherence overhead, which can consume up to 96% of total operations as shown in Fig-ure 1(b). In contrast, MCHA abandons GBs, instead granting programmers explicit control over a reconfigurable memory fabric through the multi-tiered NoC. MCHA vs. Near-Data Processing. While NDP and Processing-In-Memory (PIM) designs like Tesseract [81] and UPMEM [82] successfully reduce data movement, they are generally tailored for static irregularity, such as PageR-ank [72] or BFS [73] on static graphs. Conversely, PSC is defined by dynamic irregularity with an additional time di-mension, where neighbor relationships change as the algo-rithm progresses. Existing PIM implementations, such as StreamPIM [39], frequently lack the inter-core bandwidth and architectural flexibility needed for the complex phase transitions of these tasks. MCHA bridges this gap by utiliz-ing a multi-layer communication strategy for P2P entity inter-action that releases the burden of off-chip memory access. MCHA vs. Specialized Accelerators. Accelerators for spe-cific irregular primitives can achieve high efficiency for their targeted kernels, such as pointer-chasing in graph process-ing (Minnow [83], GraphR [84]) or sparse-tensor algebra (ExTensor [85]). However, they often lack support for gen-eral PSC tasks, making commercialization challenging with only supporting highly niche computing applications. Fur-thermore, many DSAs still rely on a centralized global buffer, which becomes a serializing bottleneck as the computing scale increases. MCHA differentiates itself by proposing the data-driven programming model, enabling a reconfigurable fabric to support a diverse suite of workloads. 

## 8 Conclusion 

We propose MCHA architecture, which accelerates PSC workloads, a critical paradigm spanning MARL, SNN, and BSP, by enabling P2P communication to relieve the global bandwidth pressure that bottlenecks conventional systems. A data-driven programming model is provided for algorithm deployment. The architecture demonstrates strong data and processing locality, achieving speedups of 153.06 × to 2456.96 × over A100 GPUs in MARL tasks using a 4-chip sys-tem. Its generality and near-linear scalability are further vali-dated through multi-application evaluation and roofline anal-ysis. Two limitations merit mention: (a) MCHA exploits local-ity through fixed topologies, leaving highly dynamic graphs unsupported; (b) porting CPU/GPU code to MCHA’s pro-gramming model currently requires manual effort. We envi-sion that advances in workload abstraction and agentic-AI-driven code-conversion toolkits will together unlock MCHA’s full potential. 

## References 

[1] Norman P Jouppi, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, David Patterson, Gaurav Agrawal, Raminder Bajwa, Sarah Bates, Suresh Bhatia, Nan Boden, Al Borchers, Rick Boyle, Pierre-luc Cantin, Clifford Chao, Chris Clark, Jeremy Coriell, Mike Daley, Matt Dau, Jeffrey Dean, Ben Gelb, Tara Vazir, Ghaemmaghami, Rajendra Got-tipati, William Gulland, Robert Hagmann, C. Richard Ho, Doug Hogberg, John Hu, Robert Hundt, Dan Hurt, Julian Ibarz, Aaron Jaffey, Alek Jaworski, Alexander Kaplan, Harshit Khaitan, Daniel Killebrew, Andy Koch, Naveen Kumar, Steve Lacy, James Laudon, James Law, Diemthu Le, Chris Leary, Zhuyuan Liu, Kyle Lucke, Alan Lundin, Gordon MacKean, Adriana Maggiore, Maire Mahony, Kieran Miller, Rahul Nagarajan, Ravi Narayanaswami, Ray Ni, Kathy Nix, Thomas Norrie, Mark Omernick, Narayana Penukonda, Andy Phelps, Jonathan Ross, Matt Ross, Amir Salek, Emad Sama-diani, Chris Severn, Gregory Sizikov, Matthew Snel-ham, Jed Souter, Dan Steinberg, Andy Swing, Mer-cedes Tan, Gregory Thorson, Bo Tian, Horia Toma, Erick Tuttle, Vijay Vasudevan, Richard Walter, Walter Wang, Eric Wilcox, and Doe Hyun Yoon. In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit. In ACM/IEEE Annual International Symposium on Com-puter Architecture (ISCA), pages 1–12. IEEE, 2017. [2] Mike Davies, Narayan Srinivasa, Tsung-Han Lin, Gau-tham Chinya, Yongqiang Cao, Sri Harsha Choday, Georgios Dimou, Prasad Joshi, Nabil Imam, Shweta Jain, Yuyun Liao, Chit-Kwan Lin, Andrew Lines, Ruokun Liu, Deepak Mathaikutty, Steven McCoy, Arnab Paul, Jonathan Tse, Guruguhanathan Venkatara-manan, Yi-Hsin Weng, Andreas Wild, Yoonseok Yang, and Hong Wang. Loihi: A neuromorphic manycore pro-cessor with on-chip learning. IEEE Micro, 38(1):82–99, 2018. [3] Gene M. Amdahl. Validity of the single processor ap-proach to achieving large scale computing capabili-ties. In Spring Joint Computer Conference (SJCC), AFIPS ’67 (Spring), page 483–485, New York, NY, USA, 1967. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450378956. doi: 10.1145/1465482.1465560. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1465482.1465560 .[4] Peng Chen, Xinyu Zhao, Lina Zeng, Luxinyu Liu, Shengjie Liu, Li Sun, Zaijin Li, Hao Chen, Guojun Liu, Zhongliang Qiao, Yi Qu, Dongxin Xu, Lianhe Li, and Lin Li. A review of research on SLAM technology based on the fusion of LiDAR and vision. Sensors, 25(5):1447, 2025. 15 

[5] Yiming Gao, Chao Jiang, Wesley Piard, Xiangru Chen, Bhavesh Patel, and Herman Lam. HgPCN: A hetero-geneous architecture for E2E embedded point cloud inference. In ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 1588–1600, 2024. doi: 10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00116. [6] Jianye Hao, Tianpei Yang, Hongyao Tang, Chenjia Bai, Jinyi Liu, Zhaopeng Meng, Peng Liu, and Zhen Wang. Exploration in deep reinforcement learning: From single-agent to multiagent domain. IEEE Trans-actions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 35 (7):8762–8782, 2023. [7] Thanh Thi Nguyen, Ngoc Duy Nguyen, and Saeid Naha-vandi. Deep reinforcement learning for multiagent sys-tems: A review of challenges, solutions, and applica-tions. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 50(9):3826– 3839, 2020. [8] Zepeng Ning and Lihua Xie. A survey on multi-agent reinforcement learning and its application. Journal of Automation and Intelligence, 3(2):73–91, 2024. [9] David Beniaguev, Idan Segev, and Michael London. Single cortical neurons as deep artificial neural net-works. Neuron, 109(17):2727–2739, 2021. [10] Carver Mead. Neuromorphic electronic systems. Pro-ceedings of the IEEE, 78(10):1629–1636, 2002. [11] Kaushik Roy, Akhilesh Jaiswal, and Priyadarshini Panda. Towards spike-based machine intelligence with neuromorphic computing. Nature, 575(7784): 607–617, 2019. [12] Youhui Zhang, Peng Qu, Yu Ji, Weihao Zhang, Guan-grong Gao, Guanrui Wang, Sen Song, Guoqi Li, Wen-guang Chen, Weimin Zheng, Feng Chen, Jing Pei, Rong Zhao, Mingguo Zhao, and Luping Shi. A system hierarchy for brain-inspired computing. Nature, 586 (7829):378–384, 2020. [13] Boyao Li, Alexander J Thomson, Houssam Nassif, Matthew M Engelhard, and David Page. On neural net-works as infinite tree-structured probabilistic graphical models. In Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 37, pages 4598–4628, 2024. [14] Marcel Kollovieh, Bertrand Charpentier, Daniel Zügner, and Stephan Günnemann. Expected probabilistic hi-erarchies. In Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 37, pages 13818– 13850, 2024. [15] Shivvrat Arya, Tahrima Rahman, and Vibhav Giridhar Gogate. SINE: Scalable MPE inference for probabilis-tic graphical models using advanced neural embed-dings. In International Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2025. [16] Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat. MapReduce: sim-plified data processing on large clusters. Communica-tions of the ACM, 51(1):107–113, 2008. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/1327452.1327492. URL https: //doi.org/10.1145/1327452.1327492 .[17] Grzegorz Malewicz, Matthew H. Austern, Aart J.C Bik, James C. Dehnert, Ilan Horn, Naty Leiser, and Grze-gorz Czajkowski. Pregel: a system for large-scale graph processing. In ACM SIGMOD International Con-ference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), SIGMOD ’10, page 135–146, New York, NY, USA, 2010. Associa-tion for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450300322. doi: 10.1145/1807167.1807184. URL https://doi. org/10.1145/1807167.1807184 .[18] Matei Zaharia, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Tathagata Das, Ankur Dave, Justin Ma, Murphy McCauly, Michael J. Franklin, Scott Shenker, and Ion Stoica. Re-silient distributed datasets: A Fault-Tolerant abstrac-tion for In-Memory cluster computing. In USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Im-plementation (NSDI), pages 15–28, San Jose, CA, 2012. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-931971-92-8. URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi12/ technical-sessions/presentation/zaharia .[19] Vidushi Dadu, Sihao Liu, and Tony Nowatzki. Poly-graph: Exposing the value of flexibility for graph pro-cessing accelerators. In ACM/IEEE Annual Interna-tional Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 595–608. IEEE, 2021. [20] Krste Asanovic, Ras Bodik, Bryan Christopher Catan-zaro, Joseph James Gebis, Parry Husbands, Kurt Keutzer, David A Patterson, William Lester Plishker, John Shalf, Samuel Webb Williams, and Katherine A. Yelick. The landscape of parallel computing research: A view from Berkeley. Technical report, Technical Re-port UCB/EECS-2006-183, EECS Department, Univer-sity of California at Berkeley, 2006. [21] Brian M Rogers, Anil Krishna, Gordon B Bell, Ken Vu, Xiaowei Jiang, and Yan Solihin. Scaling the bandwidth wall: challenges in and avenues for CMP scaling. In ACM/IEEE Annual International Symposium on Com-puter Architecture (ISCA), pages 371–382, 2009. [22] Andrei Ivanov, Nikoli Dryden, Tal Ben-Nun, Shigang Li, and Torsten Hoefler. Data movement is all you need: A case study on optimizing transformers. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 3:711–732, 2021. [23] Martin Burtscher, Rupesh Nasre, and Keshav Pingali. A quantitative study of irregular programs on GPUs. In IEEE International Symposium on Workload Character-ization (IISWC), pages 141–151. IEEE, 2012. [24] Seunghee Shin, Guilherme Cox, Mark Oskin, Gabriel H Loh, Yan Solihin, Abhishek Bhattacharjee, and 16 

Arkaprava Basu. Scheduling page table walks for irregular gpu applications. In ACM/IEEE Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 180–192. IEEE Computer Society, 2018. [25] Raghu Prabhakar, Yaqi Zhang, David Koeplinger, Matt Feldman, Tian Zhao, Stefan Hadjis, Ardavan Pedram, Christos Kozyrakis, and Kunle Olukotun. Plasticine: A reconfigurable architecture for parallel paterns. In ACM/IEEE Annual International Symposium on Com-puter Architecture (ISCA), pages 389–402, 2017. [26] Raghu Prabhakar, Ram Sivaramakrishnan, Darshan Gandhi, Yun Du, Mingran Wang, Xiangyu Song, Ke-jie Zhang, Tianren Gao, Angela Wang, Xiaoyan Li, Yongning Sheng, Joshua Brot, Denis Sokolov, Apurv Vivek, Calvin Leung, Arjun Sabnis, Jiayu Bai, Tuowen Zhao, Mark Gottscho, David Jackson, Mark Lut-trell, Manish K. Shah, Zhengyu Chen, Kaizhao Liang, Swayambhoo Jain, Urmish Thakker, Dawei Huang, Sumti Jairath, Kevin J. Brown, and Kunle Olukotun. Sambanova SN40L: Scaling the AI memory wall with dataflow and composition of experts. In ACM/IEEE In-ternational Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 1353–1366. IEEE, 2024. [27] Brian C Schwedock and Nathan Beckmann. Leviathan: A unified system for general-purpose near-data com-puting. In ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 1278–1294. IEEE, 2024. [28] S Alexander Chin, Noriaki Sakamoto, Allan Rui, Jim Zhao, Jin Hee Kim, Yuko Hara-Azumi, and Jason An-derson. CGRA-ME: A unified framework for CGRA mod-elling and exploration. In IEEE International Confer-ence on Application-Specific Systems, Architectures and Processors (ASAP), pages 184–189. IEEE, 2017. [29] Zhaoying Li, Pranav Dangi, Chenyang Yin, Thilini Kaushalya Bandara, Rohan Juneja, Cheng Tan, Zhenyu Bai, and Tulika Mitra. Enhancing cgra efficiency through aligned compute and communica-tion provisioning. In ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), pages 410–425, 2025. [30] Jiajun Qin, Tianhua Xia, Cheng Tan, Jeff Zhang, and Sai Qian Zhang. PICACHU: Plug-in CGRA handling up-coming nonlinear operations in LLMs. In ACM Inter-national Conference on Architectural Support for Pro-gramming Languages and Operating Systems, pages 845–861, 2025. [31] Shaizeen Aga, Supreet Jeloka, Arun Subramaniyan, Satish Narayanasamy, David Blaauw, and Reetuparna Das. Compute caches. In IEEE International Sym-posium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 481–492. IEEE, 2017. [32] Anant Agarwal, Ricardo Bianchini, David Chaiken, Kirk L Johnson, David Kranz, John Kubiatowicz, Beng-Hong Lim, Kenneth Mackenzie, and Donald Yeung. The MIT Alewife machine: Architecture and perfor-mance. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, 23(2):2–13, 1995. [33] Sam Ainsworth and Timothy M Jones. Graph prefetch-ing using data structure knowledge. In International Conference on Supercomputing (ICS), pages 1–11, 2016. [34] Sam Ainsworth and Timothy M Jones. An event-triggered programmable prefetcher for irregular work-loads. ACM Sigplan Notices, 53(2):578–592, 2018. [35] Ruiyang Chen, Zhuoran Song, Yicheng Zheng, Zeyu Zhu, Gang Li, Naifeng Jing, Xiaoyao Liang, and Haib-ing Guan. HEAT: NPU-NDP heterogeneous archi-tecture for transformer-empowered graph neural net-works. In ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Mi-croarchitecture (MICRO), pages 263–276, 10 2025. doi: 10.1145/3725843.3756117. [36] Mohammadreza Saed, Prashant Nair, and Tor Aamodt. RayN: Ray tracing acceleration with near-memory com-puting. In ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Mi-croarchitecture (MICRO), pages 277–291, 10 2025. doi: 10.1145/3725843.3756067. [37] Je-Woo Jang, Junyong Oh, Youngbae Kong, Jae-Youn Hong, Sung-Hyuk Cho, Jeongyeol Lee, Hoeseok Yang, and Joon-Sung Yang. Accelerating retrieval aug-mented language model via PIM and PNM integration. In ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Microarchi-tecture (MICRO), pages 246–262, 10 2025. doi: 10. 1145/3725843.3756020. [38] Wonung Kim, Yubin Lee, Yoonsung Kim, Jinwoo Hwang, Seongryong Oh, Jiyong Jung, Aziz Huseynov, Woong Park, Chang Park, Divya Mahajan, and Jongse Park. Pimba: A processing-in-memory acceleration for post-transformer large language model serving. In ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Microarchitec-ture (MICRO), pages 292–307, 07 2025. doi: 10. 48550/arXiv.2507.10178. [39] Yuda An, Yunxiao Tang, Shushu Yi, Li Peng, Xiurui Pan, Guangyu Sun, Zhaochu Luo, Qiao Li, and Jie Zhang. StreamPIM: Streaming matrix computation in racetrack memory. In IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 297–311, 2024. doi: 10.1109/HPCA57654. 2024.00031. [40] Seah Kim, Hasan Genc, Vadim Vadimovich Nikiforov, Krste Asanović, Borivoje Nikolić, and Yakun Sophia Shao. MoCA: Memory-centric, adaptive execution for 17 

multi-tenant deep neural networks. In IEEE Interna-tional Symposium on High-Performance Computer Ar-chitecture (HPCA), pages 828–841, 2023. doi: 10. 1109/HPCA56546.2023.10071035. [41] Jeehyun Kim, Donghyeon Kim, Seokwon Kang, Bongjoon Hyun, Inho Lee, and Yongjun Park. PIM-CCA: An efficient PIM architecture with optimized integration of configurable functional units. In ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Microar-chitecture (MICRO), pages 63–77, 10 2025. doi: 10.1145/3725843.3756034. [42] Hyojun Son, Gilbert Jonatan, Xiangyu Wu, Haeyoon Cho, Kaustubh Shivdikar, José L. Abellán, Ajay Joshi, David Kaeli, and John Kim. PIMnet: A domain-specific network for efficient collective communication in scal-able PIM. In IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 1557–1572, 2025. doi: 10.1109/HPCA61900.2025. 00116. [43] Seunghyuk Yu, Hyeonu Kim, Kyoungho Jeun, Suny-oung Hwang, Seongmin Cho, and Eojin Lee. Com-PASS: A compatible PIM protocol architecture and scheduling solution for processor-PIM collaboration. In ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Microarchi-tecture (MICRO), pages 49–62, 10 2025. doi: 10.1145/ 3725843.3756017. [44] Hwanjun Lee, Minho Kim, Yeji Jung, Seonmu Oh, Ki-Dong Kang, Seunghak Lee, and Daehoon Kim. Be-yond page migration: Enhancing tiered memory per-formance via integrated last-level cache management and page migration. In ACM/IEEE International Sym-posium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 1763– 1776, 10 2025. doi: 10.1145/3725843.3756063. [45] Houxiang Ji, Yifan Yuan, Yang Zhou, Ipoom Jeong, Ren Wang, Saksham Agarwal, and Nam Kim. Re-architecting end-host networking with CXL: Coher-ence, memory, and offloading. In ACM/IEEE Inter-national Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 1809–1823, 10 2025. doi: 10.1145/3725843. 3756102. [46] Jinshu Liu, Hamid Hadian, Yuyue Wang, Daniel Berger, Marie Nguyen, Xun Jian, Sam Noh, and Huaicheng Li. Systematic CXL memory characterization and performance analysis at scale. In ACM Interna-tional Conference on Architectural Support for Pro-gramming Languages and Operating Systems (ASP-LOS), pages 1203–1217, 03 2025. doi: 10.1145/ 3676641.3715987. [47] Yan Sun, Jongyul Kim, Zeduo Yu, Jiyuan Zhang, Siyuan Chai, Michael Kim, Hwayong Nam, Jaehyun Park, Eo-jin Na, Yifan Yuan, Ren Wang, Jung Ho Ahn, Tianyin Xu, and Nam Kim. M5: Mastering page migration and memory management for CXL-based tiered memory systems. In ACM International Conference on Archi-tectural Support for Programming Languages and Op-erating Systems (ASPLOS), pages 604–621, 03 2025. doi: 10.1145/3676641.3711999. [48] J Terry, Benjamin Black, Nathaniel Grammel, Mario Jayakumar, Ananth Hari, Ryan Sullivan, Luis S Santos, Clemens Dieffendahl, Caroline Horsch, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, Caroline Horsch, Clemens Dieffendahl, Niall L. Williams, Yashas Lokesh, and Praveen Ravi. Petting-zoo: Gym for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 34, pages 15032–15043, 2021. [49] Alexander Rutherford, Benjamin Ellis, Matteo Gal-lici, Jonathan Cook, Andrei Lupu, Garðar Ingvars-son, Timon Willi, Ravi Hammond, Akbir Khan, Chris-tian Schroeder de Witt, Alexandra Souly, Saptarashmi Bandyopadhyay, Mikayel Samvelyan, Minqi Jiang, Robert Tjarko Lange, Shimon Whiteson, Bruno Lac-erda, Nick Hawes, Tim Rocktäschel, Chris Lu, and Jakob Nicolaus Foerster. JaxMARL: Multi-agent rl environments and algorithms in JAX. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024. [50] Jakob Foerster, Yannis M Assael, Nando de Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pages 2137–2145, 2016. [51] Christopher Lu, Timon Willi, Christian A Schroeder De Witt, and Jakob Foerster. Model-free opponent shaping. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 14398–14411. PMLR, 2022. [52] Jakob Foerster, Richard Chen, Maruan Al-Shedivat, Shimon Whiteson, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Learning with opponent-learning awareness. In Inter-national Conference on Autonomous Agents and Mul-tiAgent Systems (AAMAS), pages 122–130, 07 2018. doi: 10.65109/HGWA8807. [53] John L Gustafson. Reevaluating Amdahl’s law. Com-munications of the ACM, 31(5):532–533, 1988. [54] Erik Lindholm, John Nickolls, Stuart Oberman, and John Montrym. NVIDIA tesla: A unified graphics and computing architecture. IEEE Micro, 28(2):39–55, 2008. [55] Michael J Flynn. Some computer organizations and their effectiveness. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 100(9):948–960, 2009. [56] Lie, Sean. Cerebras architecture deep dive: First look inside the hardware/software co-design for deep learn-ing. IEEE Micro, 43(3):18–30, 2023. 18 

[57] David Mayhew and Venkata Krishnan. PCI express and advanced switching: Evolutionary path to building next generation interconnects. In IEEE Symposium on High Performance Interconnects (HOTI), pages 21–29. IEEE, 2003. [58] Debendra Das Sharma, Gerald Pasdast, Zhiguo Qian, and Kemal Aygun. Universal chiplet interconnect ex-press (UCIe): An open industry standard for innova-tions with chiplets at package level. IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Tech-nology, 12(9):1423–1431, 2022. [59] Choquette, Jack. NVIDIA Hopper H100 GPU: Scaling performance. IEEE Micro, 43(3):9–17, 2023. [60] William James Dally and Brian Patrick Towles. Princi-ples and practices of interconnection networks. Else-vier, 2004. [61] Abiodun M Ikotun, Absalom E Ezugwu, Laith Abuali-gah, Belal Abuhaija, and Jia Heming. K-means cluster-ing algorithms: A comprehensive review, variants anal-ysis, and advances in the era of big data. Information Sciences, 622:178–210, 2023. [62] Ümit Çatalyürek, Karen Devine, Marcelo Faraj, Lars Gottesbüren, Tobias Heuer, Henning Meyerhenke, Peter Sanders, Sebastian Schlag, Christian Schulz, Daniel Seemaier, and Dorothea Wagner. More recent advances in (Hyper)Graph partitioning. ACM Comput-ing Surveys, 55(12):1–38, 2023. [63] Igor Mordatch and Pieter Abbeel. Emergence of grounded compositional language in multi-agent pop-ulations. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2017. [64] Bei Peng, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Philip Torr, Wendelin Böh-mer, and Shimon Whiteson. FACMAC: Factored multi-agent centralised policy gradients. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol-ume 34, pages 12208–12221, 2021. [65] Ching-Jui Lee and Tsung Tai Yeh. ReSA: Reconfig-urable systolic array for multiple tiny dnn tensors. ACM Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization, 21(3):1–24, 2024. [66] DeepSeek-AI. DeepSeek-R1 incentivizes reasoning in LLMs through reinforcement learning. Nature, 645 (8081):633–638, 2025. [67] Jiayi Li, Hongxiao Zhao, Wenshuo Yue, Yihan Fu, Dai-jing Shi, Anjunyi Fan, Yuchao Yang, and Bonan Yan. PEARL: FPGA-based reinforcement learning acceler-ation with pipelined parallel environments. In De-sign, Automation & Test in Europe Conference (DATE), pages 1–7. IEEE, 2025. [68] Xiaoyi Liu, Zhongzhu Pu, Peng Qu, Weimin Zheng, and Youhui Zhang. ActiveN: a scalable and flexibly-programmable event-driven neuromorphic processor. In ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Microarchi-tecture (MICRO), pages 1122–1137. IEEE, 2024. [69] Shirui Zhao, Jun Yin, Lingyun Yao, Martin Andraud, Wannes Meert, and Marian Verhelst. MC 2A: Enabling algorithm-hardware co-design for efficient markov chain monte carlo acceleration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.12935, 2025. [70] Marcelo Orenes-Vera, Esin Tureci, David Wentzlaff, Margaret Martonosi. Dalorex: A data-local program execution and architecture for memory-bound appli-cations. In IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 718–730. IEEE, 2023. [71] Maximilian Schmidt, Rembrandt Bakker, Kelly Shen, Gleb Bezgin, Markus Diesmann, and Sacha Jennifer van Albada. A multi-scale layer-resolved spiking net-work model of resting-state dynamics in macaque vi-sual cortical areas. PLOS Computational Biology, 14 (10):e1006359, 2018. [72] Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and Terry Winograd. The PageRank citation ranking: Bring-ing order to the web. Technical report, Stanford infolab, 1999. [73] Richard C Murphy, Kyle B Wheeler, Brian W Barrett, and James A Ang. Introducing the graph 500. Cray Users Group (CUG), 19(45-74):22, 2010. [74] Xiangyu Zhang, Ramin Bashizade, Yicheng Wang, Sayan Mukherjee, and Alvin R Lebeck. Statistical ro-bustness of markov chain monte carlo accelerators. In ACM International Conference on Architectural Sup-port for Programming Languages and Operating Sys-tems (ASPLOS), pages 959–974, 2021. [75] Shirui Zhao, Nimish Shah, Wannes Meert, and Mar-ian Verhelst. AIA: A 16nm multicore SoC for approximate inference acceleration exploiting non-normalized knuth-yao sampling and inter-core regis-ter sharing. In IEEE European Solid-State Electronics Research Conference (ESSERC), pages 29–32. IEEE, 2024. [76] Glenn G Ko, Yuji Chai, Marco Donato, Paul N What-mough, Thierry Tambe, Rob A Rutenbar, David Brooks, and Gu-Yeon Wei. A 3mm 2 programmable bayesian in-ference accelerator for unsupervised machine percep-tion using parallel gibbs sampling in 16nm. In IEEE Symposium on VLSI Circuits (VLSI), pages 1–2. IEEE, 2020. [77] Alan Mislove, Massimiliano Marcon, Krishna P Gum-madi, Peter Druschel, and Bobby Bhattacharjee. Mea-surement and analysis of online social networks. In 19 

ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement (IMC), pages 29–42, 2007. [78] Jure Leskovec, Deepayan Chakrabarti, Jon Kleinberg, Christos Faloutsos, Zoubin Ghahramani. Kronecker graphs: an approach to modeling networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(2), 2010. [79] Hunjun Lee, Chanmyeong Kim, Yujin Chung, and Jang-woo Kim. NeuroEngine: A hardware-based event-driven simulation system for advanced brain-inspired computing. In ACM International Conference on Archi-tectural Support for Programming Languages and Op-erating Systems (ASPLOS), pages 975–989, 2021. [80] Amit Sabne. XLA : Compiling Machine Learning for Peak Performance, 2020. [81] Junwhan Ahn, Sungpack Hong, Sungjoo Yoo, Onur Mutlu, and Kiyoung Choi. A scalable processing-in-memory accelerator for parallel graph processing. In ACM/IEEE Annual International Symposium on Com-puter Architecture (ISCA), pages 105–117. IEEE, 2015. [82] Birte Friesel, Marcel Lütke Dreimann, and Olaf Spinczyk. A full-system perspective on UPMEM performance. In The Workshop on Disruptive Memory Systems (DIMES), pages 1–7, 2023. [83] Dan Zhang, Xiaoyu Ma, Michael Thomson, and Derek Chiou. Minnow: Lightweight offload engines for worklist management and worklist-directed prefetch-ing. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 53(2):593–607, 2018. [84] Linghao Song, Youwei Zhuo, Xuehai Qian, Hai Li, and Yiran Chen. GraphR: Accelerating graph processing us-ing ReRAM. In IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 531–543. IEEE, 2018. [85] Kartik Hegde, Hadi Asghari-Moghaddam, Michael Pel-lauer, Neal Crago, Aamer Jaleel, Edgar Solomonik, Joel Emer, and Christopher W Fletcher. ExTensor: An accelerator for sparse tensor algebra. In ACM/IEEE In-ternational Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), pages 319–333, 2019.